[Amit Varma]: The great thing about cinema is that you can lose yourself in it, and you can also find
[Amit Varma]: yourself in it. You can use cinema for entertainment and escapism, and you can also use it as we
[Amit Varma]: use all great art, to understand the world and our own selves better. Any true film lover
[Amit Varma]: will do both of these, often at the same time. And maybe as time passes and you grow older,
[Amit Varma]: you can map out your life and the person you are through the films that you have loved.
[Amit Varma]: And for a film lover to talk to other film lovers, there are few joys greater than that.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is about exactly that, as I got two close friends who are also cinema buffs
[Amit Varma]: to have a chat about movies. Now, I know that these days, authorities scan conversations
[Amit Varma]: for keywords and haul people off to jail if there's any suspicious language, regardless
[Amit Varma]: of context. But I can't help saying this. Our recording today was a riot. We had a blast.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is da bomb. If you love films, this conversation may make you explode with
[Unknown]: happiness.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guests today are Jai Arjun Singh and Subrat Mohanty.
[Amit Varma]: Jai is one of our best writers on cinema, and we've recorded a popular episode in the
[Amit Varma]: past. I'll link that from the show notes. Subrat was a regular contributor to the cult
[Amit Varma]: film blog of the auties, Passion for Cinema, and he also hosts a fantastic podcast called
[Amit Varma]: Haal Chaal Theek Thaak Hai. These two guys both love cinema and also know a lot about
[Amit Varma]: it. And I thought I'd get them together to chat about films, the great films of the past
[Amit Varma]: that we miss out on because of the recency effect, how Indian cinema has developed over
[Amit Varma]: the years, how we watch movies as film lovers, how films have changed us, and so on. We also
[Amit Varma]: recommend many, many, many good films for you to watch. So you could think of this as
[Amit Varma]: an unstructured kind of film appreciation course. But before we talk cinema, let's talk
[Amit Varma]: money. Let's go to a unique kind of commercial break. Capital Gyaan by Deepak Chenoy. This
[Unknown]: is like a show within a commercial from the kind sponsors of this episode, Capital Mind.
[Unknown]: Imagine you had to bet on who will win the next Wimbledon. Currently, it seems Djokovic
[Unknown]: is a strong bet. Well, during 2003 to 2008, it was Roger Federer and Serena Williams.
[Unknown]: In the 90s, it was Steffi Graf. If you have to bet, you generally bet on the best. And
[Unknown]: the best are the folks who win consistently. Businesses are the same. A business with strong
[Unknown]: growth tends to keep growing. And this growth can often last several quarters or years.
[Unknown]: Stock prices behave even more similarly. A company whose stock price is accelerating
[Unknown]: or building momentum is often a company whose business is doing well too. What goes up continues
[Unknown]: to go up until it doesn't. Just like Federer met Natal and those wins became rarer. What
[Unknown]: if you only held a stock when it was in form? You moved on mercilessly when it stopped performing
[Unknown]: and were still okay to come back if and when it started up again. This is the crux of momentum
[Unknown]: investing. Buy stocks in momentum, stick with the winners, prune your losers and be vigilant
[Unknown]: about when they swap places. This isn't a new discovery. It's been studied and documented
[Unknown]: for decades. For everyone who says the market is efficient and that all information is priced
[Unknown]: in, research has shown that momentum is a well-documented anomaly. A portfolio of high
[Unknown]: momentum stocks has a strong chance of outperforming the broader market over time. Opportunities
[Unknown]: don't only lie when prices are low. Sometimes they emerge when prices are uncomfortably
[Unknown]: high too. I'm Deepak Shannoi, CEO at Capital Mind. In our portfolio management service,
[Unknown]: we have built portfolios using momentum as one of our core strategies. Talk to us and
[Unknown]: we'll tell you more about such counterintuitive but effective strategies. We're at cm.social
[Unknown]: slash seen unseen. Bet on the company's in form. cm.social slash seen unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, I want to repeat that URL, cm.social slash seen unseen. Deepak has been a guest
[Amit Varma]: on my podcast, and he handles my money as well. My actions are the best endorsement.
[Amit Varma]: Jai and Subrat, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks. Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before I said that I had to mentally try and figure out ki kiska naam pehle do.
[Amit Varma]: And then I thought, let me go my preferred way, which is alphabetical order of first
[Amit Varma]: name. Yeah, because if it's last name, I always kind of come last. So I don't like that method.
[Amit Varma]: So first name is kind of better. Jai, you and I, of course, have done an episode before.
[Amit Varma]: And Subrat, you're a first timer here. So I'd love to sort of start by asking you about
[Amit Varma]: your journey. And your journey is so intertwined with, you know, loving films and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that is not even a separate question. So So, you know, tell me about where did you
[Amit Varma]: grow up? What was early life like?
[Guest 2]: Right. So Amit, if you are truly a Hindi film fan, then Jai is the thing that comes first.
[Unknown]: And after that, it's Veeru. Usually Jai and Veeru.
[Unknown]: Even I got that reference.
[Guest 2]: Right. So about about my growing up, you know, I grew up in a really small town in in southern
[Guest 2]: Odisha. And like many of your guests often say, you know, there are there are only few
[Guest 2]: things to do in such towns in 80s and early 90s. You, you played cricket, you followed
[Guest 2]: cricket and every single, you know, opportunity that you got to watch a film or see the straight
[Guest 2]: run Do Darshan channel and watch those TV serials you did. And do not just watch them,
[Guest 2]: at least in my case, I literally not literally, but I really drank them, you know, in the
[Guest 2]: sense that every single scene, every single dialogue was, has been permanently etched.
[Guest 2]: I often have this sort of, you know, bet with someone that I can pretty much sing every
[Guest 2]: single 80s jingle fully in Hindi or English.
[Guest 2]: Watch him run, watch him play. He's a winner all the way. You become a Maltova mum.
[Amit Varma]: The next one.
[Guest 2]: Added strength and energy, malt and cocoa, malt and cocoa, something. That's what makes
[Guest 2]: you a Maltova mum.
[Unknown]: I didn't know there would be an immediate test of my...
[Amit Varma]: Singer sewing machine. Singer sewing machine. I like that because I thought the girls in
[Amit Varma]: that were cute.
[Amit Varma]: The Hindi or the English one?
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Guest 2]: Any of them.
[Guest 2]: Do you remember those days of your childhood? You decorated those days with merit.
[Unknown]: Singer used to be singer merit in India.
[Unknown]: Those childhood memories, those talks, you decorated them with merit.
[Guest 2]: By the way, singer, I didn't realize till much later when I was in Sri Lanka that it
[Guest 2]: was actually a British company that was Sri Lanka based. And when they left that, they
[Guest 2]: left behind the singer. It was like the Indian agency houses that were left behind for tea
[Guest 2]: and other commodities. So, anyway, back. Thankfully, I cleared the two quick, rapid, you know,
[Amit Varma]: questions that you gave.
[Amit Varma]: It's a sign of my poor memory that I actually asked you about two of the really popular
[Amit Varma]: jingles, you know, ideally, you should have taken something obscure and tested it, since
[Amit Varma]: you said every jingle.
[Guest 2]: I mean, yeah, the TV serials, their songs, so on and so forth. But so yeah, so there
[Guest 2]: was a, I think, just the absolute lack of any other avenue to sort of, you know, engage
[Guest 2]: yourself. But I think that was the case for most other kids also. But in my case, I guess
[Guest 2]: it just became somewhat more intense than others, because I think a lot of us, you know,
[Guest 2]: who have been on your shows as well are introverts. So you create your own sort of universe and
[Guest 2]: you stay in it, you, you think about it, you, you know, play it back in your mind.
[Guest 2]: Were you a daydreamer?
[Guest 2]: Lots, actually, quite a bit. I mean, all kinds of imaginary friends in my head. And that
[Guest 2]: took a long time to go. They were there for a long, long period of time. So yeah, and
[Guest 2]: then the other thing was that my father was also into films. So in our home, the idea
[Guest 2]: that you would watch a film had no sort of, you know, stigma kind of thing attached to
[Guest 2]: it, which oftentimes I saw in my, you know, other friends, their parents would, you know,
[Guest 2]: comment on it. But in our house, you know, you watch as many films as you want. And it
[Guest 2]: used to be an event if there was a film on Doordarshan, like my father would start telling
[Guest 2]: us the previous day that tomorrow, you know, there is, there is Kashmir Ki Kali, he would
[Guest 2]: start giving us that, you know, where was he in 1964, when he watched that film, you
[Guest 2]: know, then this song will come. And when the movie will start playing, the minute he hears
[Guest 2]: the first train of the music, he'll say, now this is the song. And, you know, as a kid,
[Guest 2]: all of those things seemed magic. In fact, the one thing that my father did, which I
[Guest 2]: genuinely thought was magic, and therefore, then I sort of worked on it was, he, I mean,
[Guest 2]: we would play the radio. And that guy will, you know, the announcer will say that, Abhi
[Guest 2]: bhai, suniye film Mughal-e-Azam ka, Nata Mangeshkar ka gaana, Sangeetkar Naushad, and whatever
[Guest 2]: Geetkar hai, Shakeel. And my father will say, Khuda Nige Bahan Ho Tumhara. And then the
[Guest 2]: song will come. How did this guy know? By the time I was 12, I was beating my father
[Guest 2]: in that game. So because it just became an obsession. So yeah, so I mean, just to, you
[Guest 2]: know, go back, I mean, since it was a small town, we barely had any exposure to Hollywood.
[Guest 2]: And you know, the whole Bollywood scene was initially, you watch whatever came in the
[Guest 2]: cinema hall, there was only one cinema hall. But I possibly, you know, this is like genuine
[Guest 2]: cinema Paradiso thing. Main wahan hota tha, projectionist uncle hote the, hamara kaam
[Guest 2]: chalta tha. But then the video revolution also happened. And then this, you know, this
[Guest 2]: 25 rupees main you rent out the video recording, that player for a day. And then the idea was,
[Guest 2]: how do you maximize because that's, you know, economics, fixed cost of use pe kitna variable
[Guest 2]: chala sakte ho. So then we would get six or eight cassettes. And then you know that you
[Guest 2]: want to watch two, the other six were tukka, whatever was there in that guy's, in that
[Guest 2]: library, right, you just picked up and you started watching them. So this continued till
[Guest 2]: about when I was in school. And I think I can safely say that everything that was there
[Guest 2]: to be shown on Doordarshan, Hindi, English, Malayalam, all regional languages, Saturday
[Guest 2]: afternoon, I used to just watch every single one of them, any film related programs, you
[Guest 2]: know, baato baato mein, this has been Handa's program and this Tabassum's phool khile hain
[Guest 2]: gulshan gulshan and just, you know, watch every single one of them and just store it
[Guest 2]: in your head. A few things happened then, one was the video, library wala possibly saw
[Guest 2]: the, you know, initial change in taste of the people there. And he started stocking
[Guest 2]: up some, you know, Hollywood films. So, Indiana Jones was one of those early ones, which was
[Guest 2]: when I first realized ki kuch hai, there is something very different about these films
[Guest 2]: and he had some, the usual Superman, the original, which as kids we all enjoyed. And then, and
[Guest 2]: then by the time we were 14 or so, we were interested in other kind of cassettes as well.
[Guest 2]: And so then that guy would give us one of the two, right, he would either give us some
[Guest 2]: horror film. And I don't know if you know this, this, I mean, Evil Dead, as a film has
[Guest 2]: been seen by every single guy in chota kasbah of India in the late 80s, early 90s, because
[Guest 2]: the video cassette of Evil Dead was possibly the most most sort of ripped and copied video
[Guest 2]: cassette of all times. Baad mein pata chala ki wo Sam Raimi ne banaya hai. And much later
[Guest 2]: I watched it again. And I realized, maybe the craft is good. I mean, it's quite a quite
[Guest 2]: a good film. But anyway, so either we were watching crazy horror shit, which none of
[Guest 2]: us had any idea whether it's good or bad. So, you know, Evil Dead and this whole early
[Guest 2]: graven filmography or carpenter filmography, some random, I mean, sometimes there's not
[Guest 2]: even be full films. And we would just watch some parts of it and then the cassette would
[Guest 2]: get stuck or something would happen. And then the Doordarshan, you know, also started showing
[Guest 2]: on these Friday evenings, after 10pm films. And because I was a somewhat of a decent student,
[Guest 2]: my parents thought that if he's sitting alone, and you know, after dinner, he must be studying,
[Guest 2]: which I was most of the days, but Friday, I would turn on the TV, put the volume to
[Guest 2]: zero and watch those Friday night Doordarshan English films. They were a mixed bag. I mean,
[Guest 2]: some of those were really good films. Somewhere like she'll be wearing pink pajamas or something.
[Guest 2]: So the return was variable. But I got whatever my teenage, you know, hormonal wants were,
[Guest 2]: they were getting satisfied as part of that. So that that was how it went on till about
[Guest 2]: 17. At 17, I went to engineering college, which was this complete disaster in terms
[Guest 2]: of you know, liking, getting to see things etc. So all that I did in engineering college
[Guest 2]: was watch the standard Bollywood fare. And then occasionally, you would get some video
[Guest 2]: cassettes again the same way and watch some of those films. But thankfully, since it was
[Guest 2]: a bit a bit of a bigger town, there used to be some like big releases, you know, The Fugitive
[Guest 2]: or something, those kind of movies would come in the bodyguard in the mid 90s, early 90s
[Guest 2]: etc. But then in one of those years, I went to Kolkata for my summer training. And I did
[Guest 2]: that at, you know, one of those MNC plants in Calcutta. And since I was always interested
[Guest 2]: in it, people told me that you must go to this place called Nandan. And I didn't have
[Guest 2]: a clue about Nandan then, but then I went to Nandan and I realized this is like, you
[Guest 2]: know, the cultural hub of Kolkata of a certain kind of a certain Badralok variety. And Nandan
[Guest 2]: had then three halls, the two larger ones and one small, just about 40 seater. And the
[Guest 2]: 40 seater would play like great films all the time. And so that those two months, I
[Guest 2]: think I did, I watched all kinds of things. Mind you, in this during the same time, because
[Guest 2]: of the sort of the desert that the engineering college was, I had gotten myself a membership
[Guest 2]: of the local Max Muller Bhavan. That engineering college was in a town that had a steel plant
[Guest 2]: that had a German partnership. You know, Nehru had done all these partnerships, each steel
[Guest 2]: plant had some was German, some was Brit, some was Russian, something else or some other
[Guest 2]: thing. And so I had told my one of my profs that please give me that membership. He was
[Guest 2]: like, why would you want a Max Muller? Have you come here to do engineering or have you
[Guest 2]: come to Max Muller Bhavan to study? I said, forgive me, give it to me. So I was reading
[Guest 2]: quite indiscriminately, all kinds of stuff. So I would go into the library, no idea, there
[Guest 2]: was no internet or anything to guide your taste. I was decent at quizzing. So I knew
[Guest 2]: some famous books. So if I saw a famous book, I'd pick it up. Otherwise, it was like Milan
[Guest 2]: Kundera. Genuinely, I thought he was an Indian author. So I picked up the first one. First
[Guest 2]: thing I remember is I read The Unbearable Lightness of Being. I was not like you, Amit,
[Guest 2]: who was reading the whole of Shakespeare canon by the time he was 10. But I was reading Kundera
[Guest 2]: in 18. And then when I finished all Kundera, then some one day I saw Antichrist. So I thought
[Guest 2]: maybe this is also a good book. It looked well-thumbed. I don't know who was reading.
[Guest 2]: Some German expats were reading him, I guess, in that place. So I picked those things up.
[Guest 2]: So I did the same thing in Kolkata. Kuch bhi aara tha, dekh liya. And that's where I think
[Guest 2]: I saw some, I mean, I didn't know what, why they were looking different or appearing different,
[Guest 2]: but I knew something intense was happening on the screen. I mean, I remember watching,
[Guest 2]: you know, 400 Blows. And I realized yeh kuch toh hai boss. Something is there. And I mean,
[Guest 2]: the usual thing was happening. It was some summer kind of fest and they were just playing
[Guest 2]: French New Wave and some Italian New Wave and all of those stuff. Pasolini. And so I
[Guest 2]: watched a few of those. Sodor and whatever. 120 Days. Then I came back. The usual life
[Guest 2]: continued. But that got became a bit of a thing that I'm missing out on something. Something
[Guest 2]: big is there out there. So every couple of months I would make the Kolkata trip. It was
[Guest 2]: like about six or seven hours in train. And watch whatever was playing in the cinema hall.
[Guest 2]: And Kolkata did have reasonably good, you know, new films coming in there. And then
[Guest 2]: spend time in, in Nandan. And that sort of whetted my appetite quite a bit. By the time
[Guest 2]: I left it, and then I did my postgrad in Kolkata itself. So that became a good sort of a place
[Guest 2]: to do all of this. And then after postgrad, as luck would have it, I had a job that took
[Guest 2]: me all over the world for the first 10 years. That I just completely sated myself. What
[Guest 2]: also had happened one big thing that people often don't realize. The, you know, these
[Guest 2]: cable wala started showing TCM in India. Again, you know, I don't know why they don't do it
[Guest 2]: now in India. That thing just ran for some seven, eight years.
[Guest 1]: What is TCM?
[Guest 2]: It used to be called TNT when they started out. The Turner Network Television. And then
[Guest 2]: it became TCM later.
[Guest 2]: It's the Turner classic movies. It's still there actually in the US. There is an app
[Guest 2]: but you can't pay in India because that app is not available in India. There is a hack
[Guest 2]: around it. I will tell you some other time. So, TCM used to just all the time, show you,
[Guest 2]: you know, the great films of the 30s, 40s and the 50s. And it was available. So that
[Guest 2]: plus the, I mean, I used to be at least 20 or 25 weeks outside of India. And as luck
[Guest 2]: would have it, a lot of it in Europe. And as luck would have it for a long time in places
[Guest 2]: like Poland and Czech Republic and in Poland in a place called Woods, L-O-D-Z, it's called
[Guest 2]: but it has one of the great film schools of Eastern Europe. In fact, all the great Polish
[Guest 2]: filmmakers actually studied or taught at the Woods Filmmaking School, Andrzej Wajda and
[Guest 2]: all of these guys. But you go in the afternoon, you can just, you know, spend your time watching
[Guest 2]: films peacefully. I mean, it was like a completely different world. So those seven, eight years
[Guest 2]: where, when I sort of just watched whatever came my way. And then, you know, when I would
[Guest 2]: be in the US, you know, two weeks in the US, I, my, kaam khatam hua, 6.30 get back, watch
[Guest 2]: some of those US late evening television stuff, which was all great fun. I mean, all these
[Guest 2]: light show and, you know, David Letterman stuff. And then around 8.30 or 9, turn on
[Guest 2]: one of those film channels. And there were like six, seven of them and at any time, something
[Guest 2]: good would be coming. So the one great passion of mine during that time was, I just got caught
[Guest 2]: into these, you know, this American 70s kind of one pack of filmmakers, who I think are
[Guest 2]: still somewhat underrated. I mean, you know, we talk of all of these 60s and 50s guys,
[Guest 2]: but these guys are great, are great still. And that was staple HBO or whatever that free
[Guest 2]: to air channels fair. I mean, they used to put one or the other one that time. So yeah,
[Guest 2]: so that by the time, you know, by, by the time I was like, mid 30s, the combination
[Guest 2]: of reading all kinds of stuff and watching all kinds of stuff and connecting the two
[Guest 2]: had kind of made me what I am I mean, in the sense that, you know, I used to do my work,
[Guest 2]: but you know, I, I was in a place where, you know, all of these things were coming together.
[Guest 2]: And I always had this great interest in connecting it more than just watching one film or a book
[Guest 2]: or what, you know, just by on its own. And there is a way to appreciate it on its own
[Guest 2]: as well. My, the great fun I used to have was in sort of finding somewhat strained linkages
[Guest 2]: at times. But it was good fun to find those linkages. And yeah, great memories of those
[Guest 2]: days. I mean, being in New York, going to East Village, there is a Korean video store,
[Guest 2]: very famous. I don't know if you shut down now. If you go there, you will, I mean, just
[Guest 2]: the best of world cinema would be there for you to buy. And I remember actually meeting
[Guest 2]: Spike Lee there, who was shocked to know that somebody in India watches this film. It was
[Unknown]: 2006. What are you saying? Firstly, how do you recognize me? You're a great guy. I recognize
[Unknown]: you. What have you watched? I said, I was do the right thing. And what are you getting
[Unknown]: out of that? You know, this fight between African American and Italian families in New
[Guest 2]: York. But yeah, I mean, so yeah, I mean, to cut a long story, not so short. This is really
[Guest 2]: what it is. I mean, this, it's a constant evolution, but very strong passion for both
[Amit Varma]: books and movies. So I sometimes feel that, you know, a long story can never be too long.
[Amit Varma]: Borges once made a map of the world, wrote a story about a map of the world, which was
[Amit Varma]: as big as the world itself, you know, and I think the best stories can actually be longer
[Amit Varma]: than what their story is about. Because, like, it's not good. By the way, that Shakespeare
[Amit Varma]: Tana just reflected on that. I did read all of Shakespeare at 10. But my favorite play
[Amit Varma]: of Shakespeare was Titus Andronicus. So it is clear that I did not read with much discernment.
[Amit Varma]: But when the TK exciting story I want to take off on something you said, which intrigued
[Amit Varma]: me a lot and ask kind of both of you about that. You mentioned that, you know, your father
[Amit Varma]: would watch all of these films, and they had a lot of watch that song while I show and
[Amit Varma]: it had a lot of resonance with him and he'd be able to name the song before it came just
[Amit Varma]: from who the playback singer is and all that. And you could also do that by 12. And what
[Amit Varma]: what I see happening there is that there is obviously a part of your father which is touched
[Amit Varma]: by that, which is touched by a particular kind of culture, a particular kind of song.
[Amit Varma]: And through that, you are sharing in that. And typically, what happens is men don't share
[Amit Varma]: feelings, especially between father and son, especially in a society like India, we're
[Amit Varma]: never sharing feelings, you never really know the other person, you're kind of imprisoned
[Amit Varma]: in your respective roles and the grooves that you've gotten into. And I'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud here. But when you said that, it seemed that that is a very interesting way to get
[Amit Varma]: to know somebody else, especially in this particular kind of relationship, through a
[Amit Varma]: particular kind of art, like I think my father also, until the end wasn't really communicative.
[Amit Varma]: But I could get glimpses of his by the kind of things he wanted to read in his last days.
[Amit Varma]: He'd asked me to, you know, he shared my Amazon account. So he asked me to buy some Stefan
[Amit Varma]: Zwick for him on the Kindle, which I did. And then I started reading Zwick myself and
[Amit Varma]: all I had read of Stefan Zwick before that was the Royal Game, which was about chess
[Amit Varma]: and all that. But then you look at his writings on exile, on feeling not at home where you
[Amit Varma]: are, and there is something in that. So, you know, what are sort of your thoughts on this,
[Amit Varma]: on how these shared interests between people are not just shared interests, but they are
[Amit Varma]: a kind of connection, because you're getting, you're in a sense, when I tell you about a
[Amit Varma]: book I really like, I am bearing a part of myself to you and vice versa.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, before I come to that, Amit, I just wanted to say, listening to Subrata, I was
[Guest 1]: just reminded again of how even when the specifics of our lives are different, you know, someone
[Guest 1]: growing up in a small town, someone growing up in Delhi, for instance, but there's something
[Guest 1]: about there's a shared experience when it comes to Indians of a particular generation,
[Guest 1]: going through this journey of the 1980s. So much of what you said was just instantly relatable,
[Guest 1]: even though, you know, the specifics of my life may have been different. You know what
[Guest 1]: you said about the horror films. Today, I think of myself as someone who's, you know,
[Guest 1]: at risk of sounding pompous, something of an authority on horror cinema. It's something
[Guest 1]: that I've been very interested in, you know, going back to the 1910s, 1920s, all sorts
[Guest 1]: of horror films. But listening to Subrata, I was actually reminded that one of my entry
[Guest 1]: points into horror cinema was for base reasons, which is for the potentially salacious content,
[Guest 1]: because as you know, in the 1980s, certain sorts of horror films were among mainstream
[Guest 1]: films that were somewhat available at video parlours. They were the ones where you had
[Guest 1]: the most chance of seeing nudity, for instance. You know, you have the classic 1980s American
[Guest 1]: cliche of the coeds making out before the monster comes for them, you know, and the
[Guest 1]: whole moralistic thing, the evil dead, the Friday the 13th series and so on. So I was
[Guest 1]: reminded of that. And of course, what you said about the Friday night films and what
[Guest 1]: you said about the regional language, the non Hindi language films that would play on
[Guest 1]: Sunday. There's so much shared experience there. To come to what you said just now,
[Guest 1]: Amit, I was also, it's true, obviously, you know, the way in which we get to know other
[Guest 1]: people through these shared tastes. And in fact, since you mentioned parents and since
[Guest 1]: you mentioned a father specifically, I was also reminded that I had quite a problematic
[Guest 1]: relationship with my father in the sense that my parents were divorced when I was 9 or 10.
[Guest 1]: My father had a history of substance abuse, there was domestic violence, etc. It wasn't
[Guest 1]: a very happy situation. And then he passed away a few years ago, and again, in very sad
[Guest 1]: circumstances. And there's a lot of regret that I have whenever it comes to him not being
[Guest 1]: able to bond with him or talk with him. Yet one of the fondest and gentlest memories that
[Guest 1]: I have vis-a-vis my father, which is also something that's a reminder that there was
[Guest 1]: a point in his life, at least when things were relatively normal, when he was interested
[Guest 1]: in the same things that I would independently become interested in later. When I was 16,
[Guest 1]: on my birthday, he gifted me an old book of his, which was actually a book of his dating
[Guest 1]: back to the early 70s. It's Garson Cannon's book on Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy.
[Guest 1]: Tracy and Hepburn. It's a very personal book on Tracy and Hepburn written by one of their
[Guest 1]: closest friends. So it's a warm, affectionate, up-close look at these two great stars. And
[Guest 1]: my father, when he was fairly young, just in his early, when he was around 20, 21, he
[Guest 1]: bought the book and he had it with him. He gifted it to me more than 20 years later.
[Guest 1]: And I still have it with me. He has a very nice dedication on it. And it strikes me that
[Guest 1]: I never actually sat with him and discussed old films with him. That never really happened.
[Guest 1]: But this did provide me a window into the things that he might have been interested
[Guest 1]: in as well. And of course, with my mother, it was a different relationship. It was a
[Guest 1]: much, much closer, much more long lasting relationship. Some of my movie love came from
[Guest 1]: her. She was a very egalitarian viewer. She never really had highbrow taste, but she was
[Guest 1]: into all sorts of films in the 90s, which was supposedly such a bad time for mainstream
[Guest 1]: Hindi cinema. She would be sitting and watching video cassettes of everything and refusing
[Guest 1]: to even fast forward the songs, which is something that everybody did back then because the songs
[Guest 1]: were so lousy and you just felt like you deluded yourself that the rest of the film is worthwhile,
[Guest 1]: but fast forward the song. She would insist on the song being played all the way through
[Guest 1]: no matter how tuneless it was. So that, of course, also played a part. At the same time,
[Guest 1]: she also from her South Bombay childhood, she had memories of Hollywood films of an
[Guest 1]: earlier of another era, which were perhaps more sophisticated films. So that did come
[Guest 1]: down to me a bit. But yeah, what you say about the shared experiences is obviously completely
[Guest 1]: true.
[Guest 2]: I mean, just on that book, Hebburn and Tracy book, they never married. Tracy was still,
[Guest 2]: you know, he had, he was married and he never, but, you know, and Tracy was, I mean, he was
[Guest 2]: really ill in his last days. And, you know, it's an industrial lore as to how Hebburn
[Guest 2]: took care of him in the last few years. And again, these are things that, these are things
[Guest 2]: that have picked up just watching some random documentary in some evening or somewhere.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's just amazing how many things you pick up if you just are interested in
[Guest 2]: films about, you know, about just the people and the characters. But going back, you know,
[Guest 2]: the interesting thing is my on, you know, about father and shared interests and things
[Guest 2]: of that kind. I mean, there is always this part of you that wants to prove, you know,
[Guest 2]: to your father that you are, you are good, right? And you're good in the things that
[Guest 2]: he values, right? So, that obviously, so this was not the rebel phase. This was the early
[Guest 2]: phase when, you know, you would like to show to him that you are, you are really a good
[Guest 2]: guy. And so I was, I was interested in doing that. But quite honestly, somewhere the thing
[Guest 2]: also changed where I really started liking that stuff. And I often, I mean, I have this
[Guest 2]: arguments and sometimes written about it as to run that podcast, I have mentioned this
[Guest 2]: a few times, you can, you can, you know, point to, you know, the 40s and the 50s and the
[Guest 2]: 60s of Hindi cinema. And Hindi cinema is what I'm more comfortable with. I've seen some
[Guest 2]: of the other language cinemas during that time. And some of that might be true, might
[Guest 2]: hold true for them as well. Maybe the story might not be sometimes great, the acting could
[Guest 2]: be a bit hammy and theatrical. But when it comes to music, for that 20-25 years, I mean,
[Guest 2]: I've with reasonable amount of objectivity now that I've heard a lot of the, you know,
[Guest 2]: just the Hollywood musical golden age of 50s and 60s. And then listen to, you know, the
[Guest 2]: other songs, the other stuff. I think this was second to none, you know, just the idea
[Guest 2]: of the composer coming up with those tunes, the lyric being written in a way that is both
[Guest 2]: relevant to that script, but on its own great poetry. Some of the best singers, I don't
[Guest 2]: think the three have come together so well. At any time, I mean, there might be just a
[Guest 2]: few similar phases, maybe some late, you know, 19th century France and maybe Hollywood, you
[Guest 2]: know, the golden age of Hollywood musicals. But I mean, it's very difficult to find that
[Guest 2]: kind of coming together of talent and just the quality of that output. And I don't think
[Guest 2]: people fully appreciate now in India, what was that phase like? And I guess it will take
[Guest 2]: maybe another 100 years later, we'll just be wondering how did this happen. And for
[Guest 2]: at least me, I was deeply invested in it. And it's almost like now it's, I mean, every
[Guest 2]: day I just go deeper into it. So I'm never bored of it. You know, it's on a standalone
[Guest 2]: basis. Even when I was a child, I realized this was something really good. And that often
[Guest 2]: I realized also it was something precious, because I could compare it with what I was
[Guest 2]: listening to then, which was sort of prevalent in the Ganesh Pooja pendals of where I was
[Guest 2]: growing up. You know, and I realized that was we've lost something precious, but whatever
[Guest 2]: this was, this is really, really good stuff. And that realization was, maybe my father
[Guest 2]: stoked it. Maybe in order to impress, I continued to sort of invest time on it. But once I was
[Guest 2]: out of it, and just on a standalone basis, I just became completely obsessed with it.
[Guest 2]: And that obsession continues. I mean, I, I've not gone back and watched a lot of old Hindi
[Guest 2]: films, a second or a third time, a few I have. But songs every morning, I mean, I start my
[Guest 2]: day with, after the initial Bheem Sen Joshi and Mallika Arjun Mansoor and Kumar Gandha,
[Guest 2]: that's like for about 20 minutes, my first port of call is Ratha. So I, you know, so
[Guest 2]: yeah, so my father led me into that. And then, you know, I'm always grateful that I discovered
[Guest 2]: something that has given a lot of comfort in some sense meaning to my life from there
[Guest 2]: on. I mean, it's, like I said, it's an OSS in my life, if everything else is going wrong,
[Guest 2]: that thing in the morning, just puts everything into perspective that no matter how things
[Guest 2]: are, how bad they are, this will always stay with me and this appreciation of what is what
[Guest 2]: I'm hearing will always stay with me.
[Guest 1]: If I can just, just add something to that. Subrata, you of course, are talking more about
[Guest 1]: the audio experience, you know, the combination of the song, the lyric, the quality of the
[Guest 1]: singing, the composition and so on. There's that other dimension to it, which is not consistently
[Guest 1]: there, but certainly in the films of some directors like Vijay Anand, Guru Dutt, Raj
[Guest 1]: Kapoor to some degree, Bimal Roy, the visualization. And of course, we all know that there are
[Guest 1]: many instances in old Hindi cinema of a great song not being brought well to the screen,
[Guest 1]: you know, there's a lip syncing is a bit off, the actors gestures are a bit off, the editing
[Guest 1]: is less than perfect. But, you know, there's so many other cases in the films of the filmmakers
[Guest 1]: I mentioned, where there's so much attention to detail that's gone into how the thing appears
[Guest 1]: on the screen, you know, in films like Guide, for instance, or Kagaz Ke Phool or there are
[Guest 1]: many other films, some of Rishikesh Mukherjee's work as well, some of the later work and it's
[Guest 1]: really quite a remarkable achievement to have all that brought together so well, especially
[Guest 1]: given the conditions in which many of these films were made, where music was composed
[Guest 1]: separately, the lyrics were written separately, very often, in some cases, musical sequences
[Guest 1]: were shot by the assistant director, rather than the main director. This wasn't the case
[Guest 1]: for people like Guru Dutt and Vijay Anand and Rishikesh Mukherjee, but it was the case
[Guest 1]: sometimes. So that really, and I'm speaking now as someone who has to admit to having
[Guest 1]: come a bit late to that particular world. It really, it was fairly late in life that
[Guest 1]: I really rediscovered or properly discovered the Hindi cinema of the 50s, 60s, found myself
[Guest 1]: sufficiently immersed in it, despite the many little flaws or little or big flaws that you
[Guest 1]: pointed out, you know, the awkwardness, the tonal unevenness of many of those films, the
[Guest 1]: formulaic nature of some of them. But the good stuff, you know, it's fairly late in
[Guest 1]: life, it's just swept over me. And that's also one reason why I ended up doing this
[Guest 1]: book on Rishikesh Mukherjee, because it just came from a place where I had suddenly in
[Guest 1]: my 30s, I said, Wow, okay, I've discovered this world. And there was a time when I used
[Guest 1]: to think of cinema only in terms of good cinema only in terms of the Goddards and the felonies
[Guest 1]: and that sort of thing. And suddenly, this is a new language that I'm rediscovering and
[Guest 1]: finding warmth and something really stimulating in it as well.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so I mean, you know, since we are talking about this, sometimes I, you know, mention
[Guest 2]: this just to give people a bit of context about some of these people and some of these
[Guest 2]: names and maybe later they became caricatures of their own, sort of what they were doing.
[Guest 2]: So for instance, take Raj Kapoor. By the time he was 25, he was running a studio, he was
[Guest 2]: a producer, he was a director, he got some of the best talents together, you know, Shankar,
[Guest 2]: Jai Kishan, Hasrat, Shailendra, Lata, Mukesh, K. A. Abbas, for writing scripts, Ramanand
[Guest 2]: Sagar was his assistant, of course, he went on to make Ramayana with those arrows flying
[Guest 2]: from one end to the other, and one of them disappearing and much to the surprise of Lakshman.
[Guest 2]: I mean, this entire Kedar Sharma, there were a whole lot of people that he brought together
[Guest 2]: when he was 25. I mean, he was just leader of men, women, whatever you might call it.
[Guest 2]: And then he was asking them to, I mean, those initial films, I mean, you know, Aag is a
[Guest 2]: little uneven. I mean, it's still a very powerful story, and very different story. I mean, it's
[Guest 2]: a story of three different women, one of who has actually had, and he kind of repeated
[Guest 2]: the story later in Satyam, Shivam, Sundaram. But you take Awara, you take Shree Charasubis,
[Guest 2]: these are just almost like, you know, for a 27 year old, for a 28 year old to be producer,
[Guest 2]: director, then do all of these things together, and bring that story to light. And these are
[Guest 2]: not like just domestic successes. I mean, Awara was just an international, global hit.
[Guest 2]: I mean, even when you go now to Greece, you know, forget the Eastern Europe, that is of
[Guest 2]: course, a well documented story. There's just fans of Nargis and fans of Awara. But just
[Guest 2]: to point one particular, and sometimes people fully, I mean, don't appreciate this. So just
[Guest 2]: take Shree Charasubis, right? There's Shree Charasubis, I mean, for those who have not
[Guest 2]: seen the film, is a classic story of a guy coming from a village, comes to big bad, bad
[Guest 2]: Bombay. He's a, you know, he's a simpleton, but he's a guy who sort of, you know, he knows
[Guest 2]: the ways of the world, very quickly gets to sort of appreciate it, falls in love with
[Guest 2]: a girl in the Juggi, who's Nargis. So this is Raj Kapoor who comes in. And then of course,
[Guest 2]: is really a deft hand at cards. And so, you know, he starts playing that Amit. And after
[Guest 2]: some time, you know, gets sort of drawn into this, you know, people who, you know, who
[Guest 2]: are rich, but also who are, you know, doing all kinds of nefarious stuff. And then he
[Guest 2]: there is a pivotal moment in the film, right, where he's taken Nargis to a party because
[Guest 2]: he's been invited and this is all the rich and the famous of Bombay. This is a short,
[Guest 2]: almost a replica of the Taj Palace possibly in the RK studio in Chembur. And there is
[Guest 2]: Nadira, who's in some sense, you know, the other sort of love interest who's, you know,
[Guest 2]: she has that long, thin cigarette holder, and she's smoking that and you know, all of
[Guest 2]: that. And then Nargis feels uncomfortable and there are some, you know, remarks made
[Guest 2]: and she decides to leave in the middle of the party. And then Raj Kapoor follows her
[Guest 2]: trying to, you know, call her back. And that's when Nadira sings Mud Mud Ke Na Dekh, right?
[Guest 2]: She's essentially don't look back. If you see that whole picturization, so what happens
[Guest 2]: is she says Mud Mud Ke Na Dekh and then gradually after the first stanza, you can see that Raj
[Guest 2]: Kapoor has realized there's no point following Nargis now. And this place is glitz and glamour
[Guest 2]: and all of this is great. I mean, and you know, I have sort of arrived, why should I
[Guest 2]: go back? And then not just he sort of, you know, he realizes this, he decides that he
[Guest 2]: will accept this, right? And then he joins in the song. I mean, so far it was just Asha
[Guest 2]: singing for Nadira, Mud Mud Ke Na Dekh, right? Now, Raj Kapoor joins in as Mandade and he,
[Guest 2]: there are two stanzas that he sings, right? One of them is Naino Ke Saath, sorry, Mausam
[Guest 2]: Ke Saath Jo Badalta Jaye, Jo Iske Saanche Mein Hi Dhalta Jaye, Duniya Usi Ki Hai Jo Chalta
[Guest 2]: Jaye. Both the stanzas are deep in their meaning that, I mean, you just need to, if you have
[Guest 2]: to be in this game, you have to play the game, you have to modify, change yourself. And that's
[Guest 2]: how you actually win this game. That whole picturization for about seven minutes. You
[Guest 2]: can't get more, you know, better visual sort of storytelling, right? It just captures everything
[Guest 2]: in a nice lyrical format, great song, great dancing, acting, everything together. Very
[Guest 2]: difficult to have so much of information packed. And so much of so many emotions, the change,
[Guest 2]: the, and he was doing it when he was 27, right? He was himself dancing and you should see
[Guest 2]: that the way he changes his, you know, the demeanor changes, his sort of how he behaves
[Guest 2]: changes right after he's decided that, okay, she's gone. Now, let me just plunge into this,
[Guest 1]: you know, head first.
[Guest 1]: He was also, I think, a wonderful song actor, Raj Kapoor, you know, and now someone like
[Guest 1]: someone like Raj Kapoor is very easy to sort of think of in caricature terms today, you
[Guest 1]: know, today, a lot of the cinema is just unfashionable today for many, for many young viewers, but
[Guest 1]: even people of our age who are sort of perhaps a little more intuitively drawn towards restrained,
[Guest 1]: subdued forms of storytelling rather than the melodramatic or the hyper dramatic forms,
[Guest 1]: you know, you look at someone like Raj Kapoor or an actor of that vintage, you just, I was
[Guest 1]: watching Barsad the other day on the big screen at the India Habitat Center. Now, I have to
[Guest 1]: say that I really think there was a big quality leap from Barsad to Awara, because Barsad is
[Guest 1]: a film that is difficult even for someone like me to watch. But the number of titters
[Guest 1]: in the hall, you know, young people were just laughing almost throughout the film, at anything
[Guest 1]: that that seemed to them even slightly more dramatic than what they used to. So, you know,
[Guest 1]: then someone like me gets a bit defensive at the same time, even if I can sort of see
[Guest 1]: the point of what's going on. But I maintain that someone like Raj Kapoor, I really feel
[Guest 1]: was a wonderful song actor, which is something that, you know, it's an aspect of acting in
[Guest 1]: Hindi cinema that many people have forgotten about now, because partly also because we've
[Guest 1]: entered an age where there is very little lip syncing that happens, you know, you have
[Guest 1]: the more realistic mode of a song, a very good song maybe playing in the background,
[Guest 1]: there's not lip syncing and so on. And as a result, there was the earlier generations
[Guest 1]: of actors who did this sort of thing well. When you watch the films today, many people
[Guest 1]: look at it and say, oh, they're just singing, dancing. This is not acting. You know, whereas,
[Guest 1]: you know, you look at some of the best of them and they've really thrown themselves
[Guest 1]: into that moment. They are performing the moment as well. Raj Kapoor was one of them.
[Guest 1]: I just wanted to add very quickly, since you said this, though I don't really like facile
[Guest 1]: comparisons, when I watch the best of Raj Kapoor's early work, especially these scenes
[Guest 1]: in Awara and Shree Chaar So Bees, which are visually so striking, you know, scenes like
[Guest 1]: that long dream sequence in Awara, a moment where Prithviraj Kapoor is standing by the
[Guest 1]: window and you have that you have that shadow flitting across that face. It always reminds
[Guest 1]: me of Orson Welles in Hollywood 10 years earlier, and that famous quote where he was given,
[Guest 1]: you know, full freedom almost by RKO to make his first film. And he said, I felt like a
[Guest 1]: boy with this giant toy train set. And when I look at Raj Kapoor's early work, you see
[Guest 1]: that same enthusiasm, where can I put the camera? What can I do with it? What can I
[Guest 1]: do with shadows? What can I do? How can I construct this frame? And I think that's that
[Guest 1]: there's something to be said about that as well, you know, at that age.
[Amit Varma]: Lots to double click on. And the first one is kind of this, like when you mentioned that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, young people watching that they're laughing because it's so melodramatic, it's
[Amit Varma]: so whatever. And that's resonant with me, because once upon a time, I would have been
[Amit Varma]: one of those young people, right, I recognized that, that I found a lot of, I mean, my tastes
[Amit Varma]: were obviously drawn towards a more minimal, the more restrained I was, in a sense, fortunate
[Amit Varma]: enough to be shaped a lot by world cinema. We discussed this in our episode together
[Amit Varma]: Jay that I once upon a time, I didn't, I looked down on Bollywood a little bit, which obviously
[Amit Varma]: was a sort of terrible attitude. And recently, I was sort of watching Squid Game, right.
[Amit Varma]: And I loved Squid Game, but a part of me who kept finding, you know, things to quibble
[Amit Varma]: about the way they acted, and you know, it's not kind of from the Western realistic school
[Amit Varma]: and all that there's a particular thing happening there. And, and I kept realizing that the
[Amit Varma]: quibbler was just getting it all wrong, that, you know, that I should just enjoy it for
[Amit Varma]: what it is, and not try to fit it into my perception of what is worthy art. Like I was
[Amit Varma]: reading this book called The Immediate Experience, which is a collection of Robert Warshaw's
[Amit Varma]: essays, famous critic from back in the day. And, and the title says everything, the immediate
[Amit Varma]: experience and Warshaw's whole contention was that, you know, you, you respond in a
[Amit Varma]: particular way to a film in the moment. And that response is what matters. You know, baaki
[Amit Varma]: sab jo theory lagate hai, jo gyaan bhatte hai, all that is irrelevant. How are you responding
[Amit Varma]: to a film in the here and now what is the immediate experience that is what matters
[Amit Varma]: and Warshaw, of course, was an enemy of pretentiousness. He never liked to use the term film, he would
[Amit Varma]: always say movie, he championed, you know, B movies, action films, which were otherwise
[Amit Varma]: ignored by, you know, kind of the mainstream sort of critics. And that struck a chord with
[Amit Varma]: me when I think that sometimes when we criticize cinema or criticize literature or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: are we overthinking it sometimes, that maybe what really matters is how does it make me
[Amit Varma]: feel in that moment, that you know, your father can see a classic film and hear a classic
[Amit Varma]: song and feel a particular way. And 30 years later, it can move you in the same way. And
[Amit Varma]: that alone tells me that my God, it's achieved something to have that sort of resonance.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, if you're going to quibble about ki yaar acting naturalistic nahi thi
[Amit Varma]: yaar editing aise ki, yahaan se yeh kiya aisa nahi karna chahiye tha. And I think and it's
[Amit Varma]: with age that I've kind of that I kind of recognize this that stop overthinking art.
[Amit Varma]: You know, sometimes you just got to sit back and soak it in. So what are sort of your ways
[Amit Varma]: of thinking about it? And you know, especially you Jai, you're a professional critic in a
[Amit Varma]: manner of speaking, you've made that journey through different kinds of criticism. And
[Amit Varma]: we've again discussed some of that journey in our prior episode. So what's your sense
[Amit Varma]: of that? Has there been a change in you as well with how you view films and art?
[Guest 1]: Amit, it's a difficult question. I can see both sides of it. You know, I mean, I, you
[Guest 1]: know, I'd actually like to just go entirely with what you said just now about what about
[Guest 1]: the wash-off position. You know, just let it let the experience sweep over you react
[Guest 1]: honestly to what what you have experienced in the moment and just do that. And I've had
[Guest 1]: some wonderful moments of that sort. Also, you know, I can just give you an example of
[Guest 1]: the top of my head. I'd written a piece about this, you know, where, you know, I was watching
[Guest 1]: Zoya Akhtar's Dil Dhadakne Do, which is and you know, and just and you know, there's this
[Guest 1]: which is which is not really one of the most critically acclaimed films. It's one of those
[Guest 1]: films that people think of as it's a time it's a it's a film about rich people's problems
[Guest 1]: and it's not really gritty in the way that Luck by Chance or Gully Boy is. Honestly speaking,
[Guest 1]: I still think it's my favorite of her films, because it just worked on every level for
[Guest 1]: me and I was I was just watching it and there's Ranveer Singh on the screen just doing so,
[Guest 1]: you know, just just walking around being this spoiled rich brat or whatever and I'm just
[Guest 1]: you know, just interacting with his parents and I just intuitively at one point just lent
[Guest 1]: across to my wife. I was you know, she was next to me and said, you know, I think this
[Guest 1]: guy might be our best actor since since Bachchan, you know, I just said that very spontaneously.
[Guest 1]: And of course, later, I sort of thought about it and said, oh, yeah, you know, this is that
[Guest 1]: was a on the one hand I I get, you know, the value of that instinctive response. But at
[Guest 1]: the same time, there are practical difficulties also, you know, you're say you're you're writing
[Guest 1]: a review that's been written on a three-hour deadline or something, then of course, it
[Guest 1]: makes sense. You're sitting in the hall and you're, you know, you're taking notes there.
[Guest 1]: You're trying to capture the immediacy of your experience. You're very aware that that
[Guest 1]: at some point, you will, you know, you'll be exiting this this dark hall and suddenly
[Guest 1]: the world, the brightly lit world is going to be impinging on you. And then, you know,
[Guest 1]: you will you'll be overthinking, you'll be remembering the film and maybe feeling sheepish
[Guest 1]: about some things that you that you loved while you were watching them. You're aware
[Guest 1]: of that. So you're trying to capture honesty, capture your reactions in the moment, and
[Guest 1]: then write the review as quickly as possible and send it out. But what if you're writing
[Guest 1]: in the form of writing that you have to do is a long form analytical essay with a deadline
[Guest 1]: of three weeks into the future. At some point, you will, I think it's just human nature to
[Guest 1]: to be analyzing a little too much to change your view to say, okay, you know, I sort of
[Guest 1]: had this rush of emotion in the hall, but now I've thought about it a bit and maybe,
[Guest 1]: you know, I don't feel that way anymore. So I can see the value of both positions depending
[Guest 1]: on the sort of piece you're writing or the sort of discussion that you're having about
[Guest 1]: the film. And, you know, I think it's just a practical thing. I think I may have mentioned
[Guest 1]: this in our earlier conversation. But one reason why I always found it difficult, even
[Guest 1]: when I was a much younger, more energetic, more enthusiastic film buff going to film
[Guest 1]: festivals in my 20s. One reason I found it difficult to watch three or four films on
[Guest 1]: the same day was because I needed that time to myself after watching one film, if it stimulated
[Guest 1]: me in a certain way, I would need to go and sit by myself, maybe just make some notes,
[Guest 1]: maybe, you know, get my bearings, articulate to myself or on paper or whatever, what I
[Guest 1]: felt about that film before going in for the next film. Because otherwise, you're watching
[Guest 1]: one film when you're watching another, you're watching a third, coming back home at night
[Guest 1]: and and the immediacy of the experience of the first and the second film are gone. They
[Guest 1]: no longer exist. So it's a difficult question. This is just I probably just rambled on and
[Guest 1]: on. But I think I can see both sides of the way of doing this.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I have always been that viewer. I mean, I just go to a movie and I just respond
[Guest 2]: to it the way you know, it comes to me. I mean, there's not a lot of thought then or
[Guest 2]: sometimes even later. I mean, I do the connects much later, not in that day, because I have
[Guest 2]: no deadline or anything of that kind. I'm not writing anything. But most of the, I mean,
[Guest 2]: most of how I watch a film is exactly that way. I mean, I, it's just, just experiencing
[Guest 2]: it at the moment, during the moment and enjoying it. And that really, in some sense, also explains
[Guest 2]: some of these things. I mean, like, I just like sort of the big, you know, emotional
[Guest 2]: kind of films. I mean, give me a Casablanca, I'll watch it any number of times. It's just
[Guest 2]: a great film. I mean, you can say that maybe there are better films in 1942 than that.
[Guest 2]: Forget about in the history of Hollywood. But I mean, I, I remember the first time when
[Guest 2]: I saw it and how great it felt. And every time I again watch it, it feels the same way,
[Guest 2]: right. So and the same thing applies to I mean, all of the 80s and the 90s. I mean,
[Guest 2]: they were barren time, they were, they were my time. I watched all of them. Rajiv Rai
[Guest 2]: for the win, any day, right. Suppose you, if you watched Yudh, you know what I'm saying.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Yudh and Tridev, two great films and Rajiv Rai was just absolutely peak of his
[Guest 2]: form. And for those who don't know what Yudh is, Yudh is the original film where Anil Kapoor
[Guest 1]: says Jagas. So, you know, if I can just just add something to perhaps, you know, with a
[Guest 1]: more specific concrete example to, you know, just expand on that. I think both things can
[Guest 1]: also go together if you're a professional writer. So, you know, so for instance, I mentioned
[Guest 1]: the Rishikesh Mukherjee thing, you know, my starting point for the Rishikesh Mukherjee
[Guest 1]: book happened when I happened to watch a number of his films close together. And I suddenly
[Guest 1]: felt this thrill of recognising that in films that otherwise didn't really seem to have
[Guest 1]: anything in common in terms of their plots, there were these little thematic, these themes
[Guest 1]: running through the films, which seemed to point to a particular sensibility or a particular
[Guest 1]: director or script writer who was interested in certain themes. And it could be a theme
[Guest 1]: like disguise, pretense, whatever, something like that, in films where the storylines were
[Guest 1]: completely different, maybe made 20 years apart. But so I felt that thrill of that recognition
[Guest 1]: of, you know, that there's a sensibility here and I want to explore the sensibility, maybe
[Guest 1]: write about this director who's made these different works. So that is the immediate
[Guest 1]: thing, the immediate emotional response. But then when you're sitting and working on the
[Guest 1]: book over a period of two or three years, while writing those same things, you're also,
[Guest 1]: you know, perforce, you're just, you know, you are analysing, you're bringing in other
[Guest 1]: things, you know, about other films from similar genres, you're providing that contextual stuff
[Guest 1]: in. So all that also goes in. So the starting point may be the direct, immediate emotional
[Guest 1]: response. But then, as a professional writer, you will also bring in some of the other post
[Guest 1]: facto analysis that will happen.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a great point. I mean, first, we, I guess, experience a world and then we
[Amit Varma]: try to understand it. And, you know, and what you said about film festivals is really is
[Amit Varma]: resonant to me in the sense that until COVID happened, my annual vacation was spent in
[Amit Varma]: Bombay itself, where the MAMI film festival would happen, and I would go and I would watch
[Amit Varma]: four or five films a day or whatever I could, I was an expert at optimising, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: and just watch 28-29 films in the week that I could. And I get that, that you don't have
[Amit Varma]: the space to sit back and reflect. So it is all visceral, visceral, visceral, you're
[Amit Varma]: not really thinking about stuff. But at the same time, I guess, you know, you don't have
[Amit Varma]: a choice, you just want to take in as much as you can, because some of the greatest delights
[Amit Varma]: are the unexpected ones, something you've never heard of, and it just kind of blows
[Amit Varma]: you away. And of course, I think the last couple of years I was, you know, life tweeting,
[Amit Varma]: I was putting out a tweet about every film I watched. And that was, in a sense, I realised
[Amit Varma]: post facto a way of taking notes for myself also about, you know, what I liked and didn't
[Amit Varma]: like that. And I'm just thinking aloud here, I remember this quote by some translator,
[Amit Varma]: I've forgotten who I came across this while researching for this episode on translation
[Amit Varma]: I did with Aruna Vasana. And the quote was something to the effect of that even the act
[Amit Varma]: of writing is an act of translation, because you're taking your thoughts and you're translating
[Amit Varma]: them into language. And it strikes me that when you're trying to write about a film or
[Amit Varma]: write about anything, you know, where you come out of that experience mode, and you
[Amit Varma]: get into describing it or understanding it, it becomes really difficult because it can
[Amit Varma]: then be contrived. Like when I think of the great moments in movies, which really moved
[Amit Varma]: me at the time, which just had me tearing up immediately, you know, as a young person
[Amit Varma]: dead poet society, the last scene, right for those who haven't seen it and enormously affecting
[Amit Varma]: for me, those scenes are so powerful, because they just capture the essence of the whole
[Amit Varma]: thing. And they hit you in the gut with it. And for me, they are impossible to write about,
[Amit Varma]: I can write about other aspects of the craft and, you know, other things here and there.
[Amit Varma]: But for me, I can't capture that essential thing, you know, and I understand that part
[Amit Varma]: of our job is not just to experience the world, but to write about it. That's what writers
[Amit Varma]: do. That's what we all try to do it, you know, differing levels, but it seems incredibly
[Amit Varma]: difficult in one person. And you're right, I agree with you that it's possible for both
[Amit Varma]: to go together. And to me, my favorite film critic for that reason is Roger Ebert, because
[Amit Varma]: you got a sense of both conditions, you got a sense of how a film moved him deeply. And
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, you got insight into the craft and, you know, like his writing about
[Amit Varma]: Ramin Bairani, for example, when he wrote about the film Goodbye Solo, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: review moved me so much that I watched the film and was blown away by it, you know, where
[Amit Varma]: he you know, Bairani is getting to the heart of the human condition with that film. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Ebert's writing about that film, you know, leads you there as well.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, no, I, I also want to want to ask you a question somewhat related to this, but but
[Guest 1]: also before before that, also just to add that, you know, you can also take this this
[Guest 1]: business of reacting only emotionally and only this in the moment, you can perhaps take
[Guest 1]: it too far at times, you know, someone like Pauline Kyle, for instance, she was famous
[Guest 1]: for and she's been criticized a lot for it laterally. She was famous for insisting on
[Guest 1]: never seeing a film a second time. Watch it once, you know, just, you know, your scribble
[Guest 1]: away sitting there in the dark, you know, which which is wonderful. And of course, we
[Guest 1]: know her body of work and where it came from and the passion. It's not in doubt at all.
[Guest 1]: But she never kept herself open to revisiting a film and possibly changing her mind about
[Guest 1]: it. That's something that can also be done, right? You can, you might very honestly have
[Guest 1]: a particular emotional experience to a film, watching it the first time, and then 10 years
[Guest 1]: later, you're watching it again and you have a different sort of emotional experience,
[Guest 1]: which might be, you know, it might not be as good as before, or it might be good in
[Guest 1]: a different way or whatever it is, but you feel differently about it. Someone like her
[Guest 1]: did not did not keep herself open to that possibility. And she has been criticized for
[Guest 1]: it by other critics as well, you know, for just closing that. I wanted to ask you, Amit,
[Guest 1]: since you mentioned sometime back that you feel like you've become a little more open
[Guest 1]: to other modes, to the more dramatic or, you know, the other forms of expression that aren't
[Guest 1]: necessarily psychological realism. I remember I'm asking you this because on two or three
[Guest 1]: separate occasions on email lists that we've been on or conversations that we've had, I've
[Guest 1]: seen you put up your list of 10 favorite films. So you know, so I remember the first time
[Guest 1]: I saw this may have been around 15 years ago, and the last time may have been four or five
[Guest 1]: years ago. So you have films like Decalogue in it, you have John Huston's The Dead, which
[Guest 1]: is a film that he astonishingly made in his 80s, from the James Joyce story, In the Bedroom,
[Guest 1]: if I remember right, films like that, films that are mostly, you know, from a certain
[Guest 1]: mode of understated psychological realism. And I remember that I saw two lists that you
[Guest 1]: had made maybe a few years apart that were more or less the same, more or less the same
[Guest 1]: films in them. Do you feel like if you were to make a list today, that there would be
[Guest 1]: you know, you don't have to name the films, but that there would be one or two films that
[Guest 1]: don't fit that particular mode of psychological realism or understatement, something that's
[Guest 1]: louder, brassier, would there be something like that, a film or a web series even?
[Amit Varma]: Devdas by Sanjay Leela Bhansali. In fact, I remember Devdas by Bhansali, Devdas and
[Amit Varma]: Parineeta came out around the same time. And I really liked Parineeta as an example of
[Amit Varma]: melodrama well done. And Devdas is an example of melodrama overdone. But anyway, I won't
[Amit Varma]: elaborate on that. But that's a great question. And it's also a great observation. Because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in the note that I sent you guys in the email, I said, let's talk about five
[Amit Varma]: under appreciated film. And that got me to thinking about what are my favorite films
[Amit Varma]: today. And I realized the folly of ever having made a list like that, like, of course, we
[Amit Varma]: love making lists, 10 films, 10, whatever. And I think when you're a teenager, it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: But I think later, I think I mean, I for me, everything contains multitudes in a way that
[Amit Varma]: I cannot put rankings, I can no longer, you know, rankings and star ratings and all that
[Amit Varma]: just just seem weird to me. And it seems to reduce a film down to a set of qualities which
[Amit Varma]: you are then quantifying. If I am to talk about, make a list of films, I would probably
[Amit Varma]: do that on the basis of what moved me at the time what I felt like at the time and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, not pontificate on greater artistic merits and all of that. And the thing is that
[Amit Varma]: my sensibilities are what they are, and my tastes are what they are. So there's no value
[Amit Varma]: judgment, I may not have a taste for a particular kind of maximalist expressionistic art or
[Amit Varma]: film or whatever. But unlike in the past, I will no longer say that is bad. I will simply
[Amit Varma]: say keep matlab mere vibe ka nahi hai, right. So even in terms of literature, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I recognize that Salman Rushdie is a great writer that Arundhati Roy writes gorgeous
[Amit Varma]: prose, but their writing is, you know, I, my taste is more towards the minimal, which
[Amit Varma]: is why, for example, Japanese and Korean authors are much more likely to like them among Indians
[Amit Varma]: and like Vikram Seth more than Rushdie, for example. So I think that is where I kind of,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, your tastes are what they are, you are who you are. But I can appreciate other
[Amit Varma]: stuff and there are things I like now, there is art I like now, which would not fall into
[Amit Varma]: that psychological realism sort of domain. Like, for example, I think one of the great
[Amit Varma]: novels of all time is Raag Darbari, right. And I love reading Woodhouse as a kid. And
[Amit Varma]: those don't easily fall into, you know, those narrow categories. But broadly, I would say
[Amit Varma]: that, I mean, I was just about to say, you'll never find a Bhansali film in my top 10. But
[Amit Varma]: the point is that Bhansali is a bad melodramatic filmmaker, I'm sure there are good melodramatic
[Amit Varma]: filmmakers. So my appreciation of melodrama exists, but not his.
[Guest 1]: We need someone like Paro Mehta Vohra here to defend Bhansali now, because I don't think
[Guest 1]: I can do it sufficiently.
[Amit Varma]: Paro, if you're listening. Yeah. So, you know, before we get to get back to Subrata's life,
[Amit Varma]: I want to double click on one of the points you said where you're talking about the music
[Amit Varma]: of that era. And I have a couple of questions about that. That one, when there was such
[Amit Varma]: a perfect confluence of great music, which was not great music, which wasn't appreciated
[Amit Varma]: by people, everybody loved it, you know, when there was that confluence of great music,
[Amit Varma]: and all of it kind of coming together, the lyrics, the musicians, all of that. One, why
[Amit Varma]: did we lose it? Why did it go? Because you'd imagine that even left to pure market forces,
[Amit Varma]: that is what is successful, that is what is working. So why would it suddenly go, especially
[Amit Varma]: given that today we live in a time where there is scope for diversity, it is not as if the
[Amit Varma]: mainstream changes, you're stuck. That's all you have. That's not the case today. You have
[Amit Varma]: a, you know, 1000 flowers are blooming all over the place. So one, I mean, I'll ask you
[Amit Varma]: two questions, but one at a time, I guess one, why did we, you know, why did it? What
[Amit Varma]: are your theories on why that era ended? Why did we lose that?
[Guest 2]: Yeah. I mean, of course, I mean, one of the good things about life is to sit and theorize
[Guest 2]: on what happened. And I think I've done this conversation with folks a few times in the
[Guest 2]: past. But just one point on Raag Darbari. I don't know many people if they realize that
[Guest 2]: in 86, 87, Doordarshan actually had a TV adaptation of Raag Darbari. And it used to play on Thursday
[Guest 2]: nights at 10 o'clock. With the opening, you know, whatever the title song of just about
[Guest 2]: a minute by Bheem Sen Joshi. Wow, I didn't know this.
[Guest 2]: And the song went, saath sur ke saath rang hai, is duniya mein saath something hai, is
[Guest 2]: ke uske is duniya mein Raag Darbari. It was a beautiful. Yeah. And Alok Nath, fresh from
[Guest 2]: his success as master Haveli Ram of Buniyat. And well before the world knew of his predatory
[Guest 2]: ways. And yeah, well before he became the Sanskari, you know, father, was the Pehelwan.
[Guest 2]: It was a six or eight episodes. But I remember that because I actually saw Raag Darbari before
[Guest 2]: I read Raag Darbari. Oh my God. But was it good? Was the series? Yeah, I distinctly remember
[Guest 2]: watching. I remember watching everything. And I was watching everything. But it clearly
[Guest 2]: left a mark because I realized again ki kuch alag ho raha hai. I'm not processing. I was
[Guest 2]: 10 years old. But I could sense ki haan yeh kuch hai. And I, it stuck in my head that
[Guest 2]: there is a thing called Raag Darbari. And then later the moment I came across, I mean,
[Guest 2]: by the time I was 14 or 15, you know, there used to be this magazine, Hindi magazine called
[Guest 2]: Dharm Yug. It's a legendary magazine. The editor was a guy called Dharmveer Bharti.
[Guest 2]: If we lived in a country that appreciated its own writers well, Dharmveer Bharti would
[Guest 2]: have been in the same league as Hemingway or Faulkner. Because Dharmveer Bharti, before
[Guest 2]: he turned 30, by 1954, had written three of the greatest Hindi novels of all time.
[Guest 2]: He wrote Andha Yog. He wrote Suraj Ka Saatva Ghoda. And he was just, and then he just left,
[Guest 2]: I think, if you remember Sara Rai in your episode, she mentioned that her mother used
[Guest 2]: to be corresponding with Dharmveer Bharti because Dharm Yug used to be a Times of India
[Guest 2]: publication or whatever, now Bharat Times publication. And Dharm Yug used to have some
[Guest 2]: of the best cartoons. I mean, the last page, the best writing on Hindi literature, even
[Guest 2]: really quality writing on cinema. And why did I come to Dharmveer Bharti? I don't know.
[Guest 2]: I've lost the thread on this one. But yeah, so sorry, yeah. So, Srilal Shukla and then,
[Guest 2]: you know, I started reading all these Dharmveer Bharti and you know, all of these guys. And,
[Guest 2]: you know, I realized that there is more here, you know, in terms of just the Indian literature,
[Guest 2]: which again, gave me a lot of satisfaction as I went through that. In fact, some of these
[Guest 2]: things like Suraj Ka Saatva Ghoda was an unreliable narrator way before sort of unreliable narrator
[Guest 2]: was a sort of a thing in the 60s and the 70s. Anyway, going back, coming back to the point
[Guest 2]: on what happened with, you know, the talent. One is, you know, it is difficult for such
[Guest 2]: talent to come together and then have very extended stay. We almost had 20 years of it,
[Guest 2]: which is by itself just amazing. And, you know, these initial set of people, I normally
[Guest 2]: start with Anil Biswas, and then, you know, possibly SD Burman, I place Shankar Jaikishan
[Guest 2]: a bit lower, because I think part of the reason why we lost it eventually was because of Shankar
[Guest 2]: Jaikishan. These were good guys, but they were after sometimes got driven by a lot by
[Guest 2]: what market wanted, and also did a bit of politicking in terms of awards and all of
[Guest 2]: that screwed up the sort of just normal environment of people coming together and doing good quality
[Guest 2]: work. But just that early set of people, Anil Biswas, SD Burman, Chitragupt Roshan, they
[Guest 2]: were, see Ramchandra and Madan Mohan, these are like really good quality composers. But
[Guest 2]: you only had that much of time. I mean, many of these guys actually had very poor lifestyles.
[Guest 2]: I mean, almost all of them died of cirrhosis of liver. Almost all of them who died early.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's not, it's normally not mentioned as specifically, but you will realize that
[Guest 2]: some of the great names, they all died before they turned 50, only for one reason. And so,
[Guest 2]: in some sense, one reason is it's just natural. I mean, they died, who replaced them were
[Guest 2]: somewhat, you know, ersatz, you know, versions of these guys, obviously wouldn't have the
[Guest 2]: same quality. So that was one. Second, I just think that what happened was very gradually
[Guest 2]: at the margins, there was this attempt to have more and more of orchestration, which
[Guest 2]: up to a point was good. So, you know, you don't realize that by the mid 60s, there was
[Guest 2]: almost this, you know, there was this competitive race on how many piece orchestra can you put
[Guest 2]: in with Noshad hitting 100, right? I think he hit first 100 in Aan, an early 50s film.
[Guest 2]: But after that, you know, and so what he would do is he would book the studio. And he would
[Guest 2]: book every single, every single, you know, instrumentalist in town, all 100 of them.
[Guest 2]: And they would play. I think the first one I think where he did something of this kind
[Guest 2]: was Aan. Aan, by the way, was a film, very famously, it was a long film and they took
[Guest 2]: it out and you know, in various film circuits and one of the famous reviews of Aan was it
[Guest 2]: went Aan and Aan and Aan. Dilip Kumar and Nadira, Man Mera Ehsaan, and many good songs.
[Guest 2]: So this kind of a race to bottom on how many pieces you can use, how grand the music can
[Guest 2]: be in the hands of somewhat of a better quality, you know, composer and artist, it can still
[Guest 2]: be managed. And let's be honest, I don't want to get into controversies here. Many of these
[Guest 2]: music composers are completely dependent on their assistants. And it's reasonably well
[Guest 2]: known, most of our great music composers couldn't write music. They were just not taught that
[Guest 2]: way. These are all harmonium melody and then the assistants, some of whom are lost to history
[Guest 2]: because they have not been documented well now a lot of us and a lot of other people
[Guest 2]: have documented them. They would actually fill the you know, the substance of the song, right?
[Guest 2]: When the some of these great names, Sebastian de Souza, Anthony Gonzalves, these are mostly
[Guest 2]: Goan guys, because they were taught in the church how to write music. And then they could
[Guest 2]: write and they could, you know, give it to other instrumentalists and they could play
[Guest 2]: Dattara. Naushad had a very famous assistant who himself composed for Pakiza Ghulam Mohammed
[Guest 2]: and then of course, Mohammed Shafi. These are great names. But anyway, coming back,
[Guest 2]: you had this race for more number of pieces as it started becoming, you know, it started
[Guest 2]: going into less talented hands. It started turning into a bit of a noise, but then you
[Guest 2]: know, people were not, you know, bothered about that they would push that. And for some
[Guest 2]: reason, you know, I think every decade people have lamented that music is becoming worse,
[Guest 2]: but nothing would reverse it. I have no idea why, right? I mean, you know, you just got
[Guest 2]: into this gradual decline of having more and more noisy work. And then somewhere the nature
[Guest 2]: of the story and the script sector also started changing. And I think we started taking in,
[Guest 2]: you know, a lot of this with less discernment. I think people were, there would be, you know,
[Guest 2]: sort of pauses in this. I mean, you know, some of the good work was continued. I mean,
[Guest 2]: Khayyam was there. Khayyam was one guy in every decade since 1950 to 1980, he would
[Guest 2]: make good quality music. RD came in and he had, he contributed to some of this noise,
[Guest 2]: but he also continued to do good work. But I think, I mean, I don't like to take specific
[Guest 2]: names, but for many of us, you know, Kalyanji, Anandji, Lakshmikant, Pyarelal, later parts,
[Guest 2]: they were just creating, you know, just noisy stuff with no melody in it, occasional good
[Guest 2]: songs. And by the time then we had Bachchan, then somewhere the whole thing had changed
[Guest 2]: and what people were going to watch films for had changed.
[Guest 2]: And I also think that, you know, as radio started becoming less important, because in
[Guest 2]: radio, you would listen to the song, you were not having the benefit of the visualization.
[Guest 2]: By 80s, then radio was also on terminal decline. Then it didn't matter then what you're presenting
[Guest 2]: and how visually attractive that was. That's all that mattered, right? So, that also started
[Guest 2]: changing. So, I just think that the primary reason is, you just had a good fortune of
[Guest 2]: 20 years of great people being together, the moment some of them dropped off, you would
[Guest 2]: have had the eventual decline of that, that kind, that quality of music.
[Amit Varma]: So, my second question regarding this is that, did you or do you have to be a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of person to appreciate that kind of music? Because, you know, you put someone
[Amit Varma]: from a different environment and make him sit down and listen to say, Anil Biswas or
[Amit Varma]: SD Burman or whatever, and it may not strike a chord at all, there may be absolutely nothing
[Amit Varma]: happening there. I shouldn't say it may not strike a chord, of course, it will strike
[Amit Varma]: a chord, but it won't strike a chord, strike a chord. And does, you know, the kind of art
[Amit Varma]: which you consume, also shape the kind of person you are. And this could work sort of
[Amit Varma]: in a, you know, in a virtuous cycle or a vicious cycle or whatever. I mean, those kind of tend
[Amit Varma]: to imply that there's a judgment call about what is good and what is bad. But you know
[Amit Varma]: what I mean? They could feed into each other. If you are a sort of a reflective kind of
[Amit Varma]: person who likes quiet music, and you listen to that, and it just matches. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you listen to more and more of that, and there is a market demand, and there's more and more
[Amit Varma]: of that getting produced, and so on and so forth, you know, and equally, you could enter
[Amit Varma]: a cycle of a different sort, you know, and what I sort of find delightful about the present,
[Amit Varma]: the present era, maybe the last 10-15 years, not in terms of music, which I know nothing
[Amit Varma]: about, but just in terms of creativity and art and all that, is that the means of production
[Amit Varma]: is so democratized, that everyone has it, that there is a potential for niches forming,
[Amit Varma]: which you would otherwise not even have assumed are there, you wouldn't know they exist. You
[Amit Varma]: know, you can have a gardening podcast, where you would have thought, where is the market
[Amit Varma]: for this? But it can be wildly popular, or at one point, people would have said, you
[Amit Varma]: don't know who will listen to a five hour conversation, right? And I'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: in the one domain that I know about. But I would imagine the same is true for music,
[Amit Varma]: that what you should have in this era, I would assume, is that the long tail is being catered
[Amit Varma]: to that no matter what your tastes are, someone is making something which, you know, feeds
[Amit Varma]: into that, and vice versa. But instead, a and this kind of bewildering that why should
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of music just vanish when it was clearly so popular and please so many
[Amit Varma]: people in such a way that we still remember it fondly? And secondly, does it mean that
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of life a particular kind of terror of a particular kind of person is,
[Guest 2]: you know, in a sense, not there anymore?
[Guest 2]: Maybe I'll take a crack at it. And you can add, see the I mean, there is a truth to this
[Guest 2]: that you are as you have to be a certain type, or you become a certain type as you continue
[Guest 2]: to appreciate this kind of music. I've seen this for this kind of Hindustani classical
[Guest 2]: or even for ghazals. You know, you we tend to be of a certain kind. Although, even among
[Guest 2]: us, you know, the sort of that, whatever you call it, the tyranny of small differences
[Guest 2]: between us is often we are more judgmental about each other. I listen to better stuff.
[Guest 2]: But it does happen. I mean, you do tend to become a certain type. And I think that's
[Guest 2]: true. The one thing in, at least in my case, like I say, I keep my ears open. And I trust
[Guest 2]: my ears also reasonably well. So it is that, you know, then gradually, after I sort of
[Guest 2]: got deeper into this, I kept my ear open to the idea that you could have good music even
[Guest 2]: in Hollywood, because the first time when I heard, say, for instance, the sound of music,
[Guest 2]: you know, I got that plastic pack with Rodgers and Hammerstein written. Pata bhi nahi tha
[Guest 2]: yeh dono hai kaun, sound of music. First time I heard, barring that, Doremi, everything
[Guest 2]: else seemed like noise to me. Yeh kya hai? Then after, you know, after many years, and
[Guest 2]: then you heard everything, you know, the showboat, Learn and Lovell and all the other greats.
[Guest 2]: And then, then wo kaan then open to them also. You realize ki yeh bhi ek music hai. In the
[Guest 2]: same way, then I got into, for various reasons, into some of the opera stuff, right? I mean,
[Guest 2]: some great, both Bikini and Verdi. I mean, if you don't, again, many people don't remember,
[Guest 2]: Doodarshan is to actually air the, some of the great operas as well. I mean, one of the
[Guest 2]: great Saturday afternoons that I spent was actually watching Tosca on Doodarshan on DDI.
[Guest 2]: Nobody remembers. Nobody even appreciates what Doodarshan was doing for us during those
[Guest 2]: days. And I had no clue. It's just that for two days, they were showing ki Tosca aayega
[Guest 2]: Saturday afternoon ko. Aayega toh humne baith jayenge yaar, humne kaunsa kaam hai. But then
[Guest 2]: you started appreciating that as well. So if you keep your ears, and off late, I mean,
[Guest 2]: again, just to go back to this point, at least in the last couple of years, maybe the lockdown
[Guest 2]: and everything else gave me some time. I'm listening to all these people, yeah, this
[Guest 2]: Dua Lipa and Olivia Rodrigo and, you know, the Lizzo, Billie Eilish, of course, but you
[Guest 2]: know that this latest, this Lizzo song, which goes as about damn time, great music and whatever
[Guest 2]: the latest Beyonce album Renaissance. Absolutely fantastic. I mean, mostly she's again gone
[Guest 2]: back to dance. And you know, it's quite pumped up. It's not like those reflective, like lemonade
[Guest 2]: stuff. So, I mean, I agree. I am, people often say that I'm of a certain melancholic disposition.
[Unknown]: My son keeps asking me, what is this you listen to every time some lady is crying? You have
[Guest 2]: to be careful about what you're saying. But yeah, that sort of people say, you keep listening
[Guest 2]: to these stuff, you'll become, you'll become, you know, that kind of a person. But I've
[Guest 2]: kept myself open and which is why sometimes I mean, not to sort of justify this. I mean,
[Guest 2]: I'm not one of those who have concluded that Hindi cinema, Hindi film music of 40s, 50s
[Guest 2]: and 60s is great, because I like it. I mean, and then over a period of time, I've only
[Guest 2]: gotten deeper into it. And now I'm, you know, extremist about it. And I don't listen to
[Guest 2]: anybody else, you know, saying anything else is better. And I have, you know, sampled reasonably
[Guest 2]: well, some of the other stuff. And I like a lot of that. I listened to a lot of that.
[Guest 2]: And after having done all of that, I still come back to this, because this is where I
[Guest 2]: find the most comfort. This is where my heart is. So, so yes, I would say that it's not
[Guest 2]: easy to, you become a person and you continue to be that person. It's very difficult to
[Guest 2]: switch tracks. But to the extent that I've appreciated that there is possibility that
[Guest 2]: you might discover something better. I have gone out and tried that. And in some ways,
[Guest 2]: in small little ways, I think I've succeeded as well. I mean, I like a few other genres
[Guest 2]: of music as well.
[Guest 1]: I think what you said there also reminded me of that controversy about the film Ae Dil
[Guest 1]: Hai Mushkil, where the Anushka character in the film at one point say something about
[Guest 1]: Muhammad Rafi itne boring gaane gaate hai or whatever. And then that, of course, led
[Guest 1]: to a lot of outrage from from Rafi fans and and so on, because there was that confusion
[Guest 1]: of, you know, of what the film is saying, as opposed to what a character in the film
[Guest 1]: is saying, which is a very standard thing. But you know, everything you said, you know,
[Guest 1]: for me, I just think while there probably is such a thing as a certain type of music
[Guest 1]: or a certain type of film that you're naturally drawn to, depending on things like your early
[Guest 1]: conditioning, the things that you're exposed to early on, and so on. Also, but I think
[Guest 1]: to a great degree, this is also just a function of how much time you have, and how much inclination
[Guest 1]: or willingness you have to engage with many different things and to begin that process
[Guest 1]: of discovering something new, something that might lie outside your comfort zone, and then
[Guest 1]: going with it for a while until it, you know, it sort of, you know, it burrows into your
[Guest 1]: ears or whatever. So speaking for myself, I've, maybe this is just a function of the
[Guest 1]: fact that I've spent a disproportionately large amount of my time on movies, and on
[Guest 1]: cultural stuff, on movies, books, music, compared to a lot of other people. So I tend to have
[Guest 1]: very, very diverse tastes when it comes to music, you know, if my personal playlist will
[Guest 1]: have old Hindi film songs from the 40s, 50s, 60s, you know, these beautiful numbers, I
[Guest 1]: was listening to Aarpaar songs on the way here a while earlier, Geeta Dutt and songs
[Guest 1]: like that. But at the same time, I will also have Eminem, or I'll also have some heavy
[Guest 1]: metal, which is stuff that, you know, when I was in my mid teens, you know, 15, 16, or
[Guest 1]: so on, I started really listening to contemporary Western music for the first time, became a
[Guest 1]: big fan of all sorts of things, from the Pet Shop Boys to Guns N' Roses, you know, with
[Guest 1]: U2 and R.E.M. in between and Stone Temple Pilots, everything, while at the same time
[Guest 1]: retaining my basic love for old Hindi film music as well. I think it's largely, and you
[Guest 1]: actually hinted at this also in what you were saying, Subrat, it's a function of how much
[Guest 1]: time you have for these things, and how much you're willing to just explore different types
[Guest 1]: of things. And then chances are, you will find something that you like in different
[Guest 1]: genres and different modes. Also, one other thing that, you know, since you raised the
[Guest 1]: subject, Amit, one thing I've always been a bit curious about, I haven't really quite
[Guest 1]: figured it out for myself yet, is that when it comes to the songs in the two main languages
[Guest 1]: that I know, Hindi and English, it's a strange thing. But when I first started listening
[Guest 1]: to pop and rock in English, not just with people like Dylan or Kohan, people who are
[Guest 1]: known for their songwriting, for the lyric writing, but even with bands like R.E.M, U2,
[Guest 1]: etc. For some reason, once a song really embedded itself into my head, I knew the lyrics, I
[Guest 1]: just learned the lyrics very quickly. So even today, there are songs, entire albums by some
[Guest 1]: of my favourite artists who I first heard 30-35 years ago, and I just remember the whole
[Guest 1]: thing, I remember all the words. But with Hindi film music, and I know there are a few
[Guest 1]: others like me, I've always engaged with songs at the level of music, primarily. And
[Guest 1]: very often, I just haven't registered the lyrics of even iconic songs, unless there's
[Guest 1]: something really simple and straightforward, like Mera Jhoota Hai Japani or something like
[Guest 1]: that. So it's so relatively late in life that I've really started appreciating the nuances
[Guest 1]: between a Sahir Ludhianvi or a Majrooh Sultanpuri as lyricists. It's always been engagement
[Guest 1]: at the level of music. So that there could be something in the brain that just sort of
[Guest 1]: prioritises certain things depending on what language you're listening to. I think that's
[Guest 2]: something to think about as well.
[Guest 2]: In my case, it's just the opposite. I mean, for me, the Hindi film songs is first about
[Guest 2]: the lyrics. That's all I remember. I mean, in the sense that's really the core of what
[Guest 2]: gets me into the song. And that's again an obsession, just hearing it so many times.
[Guest 2]: I almost, I mean, there are a few of us, lots of us now actually, it's almost like you can
[Guest 2]: play any song at any time and we can just take the lyrics and do that. I mean, some
[Guest 2]: of the workplaces that I've been, I have this bit of a, you know, fun contest that goes
[Guest 2]: on that they can play 100 songs, one after the other. And I can tell them the movie,
[Guest 2]: the director, the music director, lyricist that I can sing the entire song, at least
[Guest 2]: the lyrics. So, so yeah, so the lyrics are my point of entry. But you're right, there
[Guest 2]: is something maybe about the brain and how we process it.
[Guest 1]: So I've been scolded a lot by poet friends and by friends who are themselves lyricists
[Guest 1]: or who are very attached to the words of the great lyricists that we've had in Hindi cinema,
[Guest 1]: the fans of Sahir or someone else or Kefi Kefi or whoever saying, how can you not, you
[Guest 1]: know, not engage with the song at that level? How can you just sort of have the tune of
[Guest 1]: the song in your head and, and not really be engaging with the words. But I think it's,
[Guest 1]: it works that way for some people.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, in some of them, like for instance, I mean, if you see Do Bhi Ghazmeen, the fact
[Guest 2]: that now Balraj Sahni has to leave the village and go to the city, while he's given his,
[Guest 2]: his land is now with the, with the landlord. And as he's walking, you get the song, you
[Guest 2]: know, Apni Kahani Chhod Ja, Kuch Toh Nishani Chhod Ja, Kaun Kahe, Kis Roj, Fir Tu Aay
[Guest 2]: Na Aay. I mean, if you listen to the lyrics, and the fact that he's now walking and he's
[Guest 2]: watching the field for the last time, that whole experience just changes. I mean, you
[Guest 2]: know, you get goosebumps. I mean, that just, Bimal Roy just got everything together. That's
[Guest 2]: a very well shot. He's, and Balraj Sahni is just a fantastic actor. So sometimes, and
[Guest 2]: I realized that was without this lyrics, the scene would have been, I mean, would have
[Guest 2]: been nothing and just, and Shailendra just gets in many films that, you know, just the
[Guest 2]: right amount of pathos with the right kind of words, absolutely spot on. I mean, I mean,
[Guest 2]: I can just go on with about 50 songs of Shailendra. Because more than say, Sahir and others who
[Guest 2]: were great poets, Shailendra was just born to be a Hindi film lyricist. I mean, he's
[Guest 2]: of course written some of the great poems as well. He was that whole communist, you
[Guest 2]: know, song, that's his. But he just knew how to write for Hindi films. And you know, some
[Guest 2]: of those lyrics just elevate the experience. When you hear it, you know what he's saying.
[Guest 2]: And then, you know, then the story and everything just falls in place together.
[Guest 1]: So, Amit, Dharti Ke Pukar Ke is, of course, also an absolute favorite song of one of your
[Guest 1]: recent guests, Varun, Varun Grover. And they used it to great effect in the opening scene
[Guest 1]: of Sacred Games episode one. You know, in a completely different context, you know,
[Guest 1]: the Ganesh Ka Gai Tonde character played by Nawazuddin Siddiqui. And, you know, and Dharti
[Guest 1]: Ke Pukar Ke is being used there. And it just, you've taken something that that's so much
[Guest 1]: of, of its time, you know, belongs to the Do Bhi Ka Zameen situation as Subrat was saying,
[Guest 1]: but you've transposed it here to a completely different, you know, aesthetic and a mode
[Guest 1]: of storytelling. And it just works there as well.
[Amit Varma]: Varun, I mean, he's a tremendous artist. I think someone who has imbibed the best of
[Amit Varma]: the past and is just doing this, you know, bringing it into the work that he does now,
[Amit Varma]: which is influenced by so many things. So I confess, I had no idea of this. And we didn't
[Amit Varma]: discuss this. But, you know, personally, where I come from, I'm much closer in terms of that
[Amit Varma]: music versus lyrics sing to where Jai is, where it's always a music, it's always a vibe
[Amit Varma]: with exceptions. And the exceptions being the singer songwriters like Springsteen and
[Amit Varma]: Dylan where, you know, you get into them for a specific reason. And therefore, you kind
[Amit Varma]: of remember the word. But most of the time, my experience with music is essentially of
[Amit Varma]: not only not knowing the words, but often misunderstanding them. So like, my catalog
[Amit Varma]: of memories is full of what is called Mondegreens. Like the recent one, which I just discovered
[Amit Varma]: yesterday that I had sort of misremembered, it was a BG song tragedy. I always thought
[Amit Varma]: the lyrics were tragedy. It's a Vulcan sonic tragedy. And obviously, that's not the not
[Amit Varma]: what it is. I don't even know what it is forgotten already. But in my mind has always been that
[Amit Varma]: and I'm content with it being that, because I don't need anything more than that. For,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to enjoy the song, though I don't even like the song. I mean, it's just one
[Amit Varma]: random example.
[Guest 2]: The great Hindi film Mondegreen is of course, from Kurbani, Anjaan song. Aap jaisa koi mere
[Guest 2]: zindagi mein aaye toh baap ban jaye.
[Guest 1]: I wasn't aware of that one. But but I know that there are some people, some highly Anglicized
[Guest 1]: people of my generation who, who listened to Ek Akela Shehar Mein and wondered why Amol
[Amit Varma]: Palekar was always looking for Sabudana.
[Amit Varma]: That's me. That's me. That's me. Right. Yeah, exactly. So here's my next question. And it
[Amit Varma]: strikes at what both of you just mentioned, like Subrat, you mentioned about Tosca. Tosca
[Amit Varma]: aaya hum toh kuch nahi kar rahe hain, batke dekhenge. And you spoke about how getting
[Amit Varma]: into something requires you're devoting the time to get into it. You can't just listen
[Amit Varma]: to something casually or whatever you actually, there's an investment you're making of yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my thought is and I remember having this argument with my dad back in the 90s, where
[Amit Varma]: he felt that so many channels wasn't such a great thing, like, which is, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: very old Fabian socialist point of view, but my scene was ki yaar choice aagaya hai, you
[Amit Varma]: know, abhi like star movies had just come. Star movies was heaven boss. Poora din movies
[Amit Varma]: hote the usmein humein, you know, where would we get to watch that?
[Amit Varma]: In 94-95, they had that 100 years of cinema thing, which went on for weeks. And you just
[Amit Varma]: saw so much stuff. Pagla gaye, khushi se baukla gaye. I remember that. Yeah. So and my father's
[Amit Varma]: sort of romantic point was ki nahi ek channel jab tha, at least you could look forward to
[Amit Varma]: things you knew they were there. Today, 30-40 years later, I kind of understand where that's
[Amit Varma]: coming from, if I don't agree with it completely. In the sense ki Tosca dikhaya, bachche hain
[Amit Varma]: jinn ke baas kuch nahi hai, they're sitting and watching Tosca, they're taking it in.
[Amit Varma]: Today, what you have is number one, as Jonathan Haidt has pointed out, most of the content
[Amit Varma]: we are consuming was produced in the last three days, right? We're not going any further
[Amit Varma]: back than that. And if I may add to that, we are just scrolling or swiping. Everything
[Amit Varma]: is scroll, swipe, scroll, swipe, aage chalo, peeche chalo. It's, you know, we are having,
[Amit Varma]: we are living in a world of 15 second experiences. And that kind of immersive thing, where you're
[Amit Varma]: not scrolling, you're not swiping, you're just sitting, you're taking something in,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even if it's a three hour Amar Akbar Anthony, you're just sitting there for the
[Amit Varma]: whole experience. You know, I don't mean ki aapko baith ke Tarkovsky dekhna hai. But,
[Amit Varma]: and I think that that's fundamental, because everything that you consume in terms of art
[Amit Varma]: is going to shape you, right? So if all the time I'm watching 15 second things, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the rhythm of my thinking, just, you know, it's shallow, I'm not really taking anything
[Amit Varma]: in, the rabbit holes I enter will also be will have this staccato rhythm to them. Ki
[Amit Varma]: acha theek hai, yeh accha laga, yeh pedia dekha, yeh kya, wo kya, wo kya, but that immersion
[Amit Varma]: is kind of not there. So is this something you've observed? Does it change society in
[Amit Varma]: a fundamental way when it happens? Or would you say that this is not happening to everybody
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, there were enough sort of people back then, there were people who didn't
[Amit Varma]: watch anything or read anything, you know, toh matlab utna farak nahi parta hai. The
[Amit Varma]: handful of people who are still going to be drawn to fine art are still going to be drawn
[Amit Varma]: to art, you know, pompous terms, but so what's your sense of this?
[Guest 1]: I don't know, at risk of sounding like a really conservative old fogie or whatever, I think,
[Guest 1]: you know, that there is a clearly a problem of attention deficit, which is something I'm
[Guest 1]: not saying, not necessarily saying this from a position of judgment, I'd like to think
[Guest 1]: of myself as someone who immerses in different things, you know, what I was saying earlier
[Guest 1]: about even today, it's very rare for me to watch, you know, even on a day where I'm relatively
[Guest 1]: free, it's very rare for me to watch more than one film in a day. Because I need that
[Guest 1]: time to, you know, if you're watching a 90 minute film or a two hour film to then reflect,
[Guest 1]: think about it. And I try to watch it at one go, minimum distractions, darkened room, even
[Guest 1]: if I'm just watching it on my laptop or whatever. But even so, I know that even I 70-80% of
[Guest 1]: the time do find myself distracted by something else, you know, and I won't be able to sort
[Guest 1]: of resist pausing the film for a while and checking something, you know, I mean, I might
[Guest 1]: just go to the film's Wikipedia page to check something that I do to follow. And then that
[Guest 1]: might lead me to meet me to another rabbit hole, because Gmail happens to be open. And
[Guest 1]: there's one unread mail there and you go there. That happens even to someone like me, to whom
[Guest 1]: immersion comes quite easily and who doesn't normally get sucked into too many different
[Guest 1]: things. So I can imagine that it does on some level, it is affecting the brains of many
[Guest 1]: of us, and definitely younger people who have only ever known this sort of life who, you
[Guest 1]: know, who are just inundated with information all the time, information, the binging culture
[Guest 1]: that we talk about, you know, the, I'm sure it's not great for the for the eyes as well
[Guest 1]: or for the for the ears, if you're listening to listening to things or watching things
[Guest 1]: with with your phones all the time. That's also the physiological side to it. It's and
[Guest 1]: I'm sure Shoaib does on the whole, I don't want to make very sweeping statements, but
[Guest 1]: on the whole, it must be affecting people's attention spans. I think it is.
[Guest 2]: See, I mean, again, my system one, one response is what Jai has mentioned, I feel that way.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's all around us. I'm 46. Like I said, I just turned 46. It feels like, they're
[Guest 2]: missing out on so many things, right? You know, just sit and watch 2001 Space Odyssey
[Guest 2]: and wait for 30 minutes till the first word is spoken. Listen to Strauss, see what is
[Guest 2]: happening. Look at what Kubrick is doing. But then you know that there is also this
[Guest 2]: system to thinking about this, which is how was Mirza Ghalib, for instance, received in
[Guest 2]: his what we might consider his, you know, peak? I don't think I mean, I think the narcissists
[Guest 2]: and the purists of his time, including, you know, the ones in the darbar and, you know,
[Guest 2]: those of us who watched the great television serial Mirza Ghalib by Gulzar in the in the
[Guest 2]: late 80s. He wasn't necessarily the, you know, the court poet or something. He was there
[Guest 2]: and thereabouts, but it was Zouk and you know, then there was Meerta Ki Mir and so on and
[Guest 2]: so forth. Ghalib was often considered to be a bit of a people's poet, a bit of someone
[Guest 2]: who was pandering to popular taste. And if you recollect the series, there, you know,
[Guest 2]: there was Neena Gupta who played, you know, Kotesan Nashne Wali and she would often get
[Guest 2]: in Radhi paper, some of Ghalib's songs, not often, she got a few times and then she would
[Guest 2]: be singing and Ghalib himself hears that Tere Wade Pe Jiye Toh Yeh Jaan Jhoot Jana Ki Khushi
[Guest 2]: Se Jee Na Paate Toh Yeh Aitbaar Hota. You know, the fact that it went to those people
[Guest 2]: and they sort of sang it and therefore it sort of continued and perpetuated and hundred
[Guest 2]: years later, you know, Ghalib is high art, high culture, while it might not have been
[Guest 2]: during that point in time. So, some of this, you know, I would say that one has to look
[Guest 2]: at history and pause and say that it's maybe we should reserve our judgment. Who knows
[Guest 2]: that, you know, this two minute thing is possibly high art. I mean, for instance, I mean, we
[Guest 2]: can go back into just the painting stuff, right? I mean, Lichtenstein, you know, he
[Guest 2]: did the drowning girl, that very famous, almost comic book like art. I mean, I'm sure nobody
[Guest 2]: thought that to be anything great at that point in time. I mean, you know, now looking
[Guest 2]: back is there a Kya Kiya Hai or even Jackson Pollock and, you know, all these abstract
[Guest 2]: expressionist or, you know, Rene Magritte and, you know, all those, you know, crazy
[Guest 2]: stuff, Golconda and, you know, they were all interesting stuff. But, you know, people would
[Guest 2]: possibly compare that and say that even impressionism and post impressionist stuff was better than
[Guest 2]: what are you putting up now, right? And then if you go back another 30 years, people were
[Guest 2]: asking, Picasso, Kar Kya Rahe Ho? Yeh Kya Hai? Why is everything appearing like a cube?
[Guest 2]: And then, you know, go to impressionism and even when impressionism was happening, there
[Guest 2]: was then in UK, this Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood who said that, listen, all these guys have
[Guest 2]: gone crazy. Let's go back, you know, completely. So, the likes of Rossetti and others, they
[Guest 2]: just, you know, went all the way back and, you know, so they would paint Ophelia or something
[Guest 2]: like that, which is very Pre-Raphaelite. So, they almost leaped back 300 years. So, sometimes
[Guest 2]: I'm like, you know, history should teach us ki hota rahata hai yaar, istare ka. And maybe
[Guest 2]: 30 years later, you might find this very different and this might be high art. And therefore,
[Guest 2]: one has to be somewhat, I mean, obviously, in the present, you crib about it, but who
[Guest 2]: knows later, how will people see this? I mean,
[Guest 1]: See, my point isn't so much that a two minute thing can't be good art. What I was really
[Guest 1]: talking about was more about how much there is competing for people's attention right
[Guest 1]: now and how in that process, you know, even TikTok can be good art. And I mean, I think
[Guest 1]: you've pointed that out as well in things you've written or spoken about. But if there's
[Guest 1]: so much available competing for people's attention and people then don't approach these things
[Guest 1]: with some discernment, with some regard for the limits of their own mind, what they can
[Guest 1]: process in a single day, then of course, you know, you just have stuff washing over you
[Guest 1]: all the time. And I think this also sort of this inevitably will lead to situations where
[Guest 1]: people are not really, where people are dabbling, you know, with, I see this a lot in my spheres
[Guest 1]: of work, book reviewers, reading novels or whatever, and writing reviews. And you can
[Guest 1]: tell that the engagement has been very superficial. It's just been, you know, there hasn't been
[Guest 1]: a real sort of effort to sort of get into it. It's skimming, skimming more than anything
[Guest 1]: else to sort of just get the easy takeaway from the thing, from what might actually be
[Guest 1]: quite a complex, nuanced work, but you're looking for the takeaway, you're looking for
[Guest 1]: a single takeaway. That happens with films, a lot of cultural criticism these days, which
[Guest 1]: we've talked about elsewhere, where, you know, you have, you have criticism that's centred
[Guest 1]: on ideology, or very often on on blinkered ideology, is just sort of is centred on looking
[Guest 1]: at a film and saying, what is the message? What is the filmmaker? What is the filmmaker's
[Guest 1]: own politics? What is he trying to say? What does this character represent? Is he supporting
[Guest 1]: this character in the film? Or is he sort of judging the character? And, you know, and
[Guest 1]: these questions are presented as if they will always have very easy, straightforward answers,
[Guest 1]: which they very often won't, with a good film, with a good complex film, they won't have
[Guest 1]: those answers. And I think that that also is very often a function of just, you know,
[Guest 1]: we have very finite time to, you know, we just need to sort of watch this film, not
[Guest 1]: think about it too much. We just sort of, you know, just looking for that one easy takeaway
[Guest 1]: from it. I think that some of that is happening a lot.
[Amit Varma]: I think part of that, that tendency is that we live in the age of the Ghoja moment, where
[Amit Varma]: you're looking for someone, something to pass judgment on. Because then if you, the act
[Amit Varma]: of passing judgment on something means you're placing yourself above it, you're elevating
[Amit Varma]: yourself, whether in terms of aesthetics or morality or whatever. And it's a toxic tendency.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree there with you. And we'll talk about politics and art later. But I'll just
[Amit Varma]: agree with both of you here, in the sense that, yeah, I mean, you know, I briefly taught
[Amit Varma]: a course, TikTok and Indian society, and the very month that it was banned. But I thought
[Amit Varma]: there was some tremendous art happening there. A lot of great expression from people who
[Amit Varma]: don't otherwise have platforms, and who don't otherwise see art from people like themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly, you just have to turn a phone at yourself and make something. And initially,
[Amit Varma]: you're doing lip syncs and memes and all of that. But later, it was going beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: It blew my mind. It just like, made me so happy to kind of see that happening. At the
[Amit Varma]: same time, Subrata, your point is great also that, you know, one, of course, how we, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you go through history, one should learn not to place things on a hierarchy and
[Amit Varma]: say, this is good, this is bad. But also, I don't think attention spans are necessarily
[Amit Varma]: declining as you know, we're having this conversation, people listen to the show, listen to the podcast
[Amit Varma]: and you, you know, one of you, I think Jay, you spoke about binging as well. And binging
[Amit Varma]: also indicates that I mean, I do see the addictive nature of binging and you're just watching
[Amit Varma]: mindlessly through the night. But at the same time, it shows that people have that kind
[Amit Varma]: of stamina to really get into a story and just really get into it, right. And the fact
[Amit Varma]: that somebody today can binge something like The Wire or something like Decalogue is delightful
[Amit Varma]: to me. And that brings me to my next question about a change in form itself. Like if you
[Amit Varma]: look at the history of cinema, all films are basically short stories. If you look at the
[Amit Varma]: literature definition of it, there's a certain amount of depth you can get and not much more
[Amit Varma]: than that, and so on and so forth. Whereas, with the modern web series or OTT content,
[Amit Varma]: you can stretch out like a novel. Like what I loved about The Wire also was how slowly
[Amit Varma]: it unfolded, how there wasn't one or two or three major protagonists, where there were
[Amit Varma]: 14, 15, 20 people who were painted with such depth that you could care for them and remember
[Amit Varma]: those characters 20 years after the show was over, you know, it's almost that long since
[Amit Varma]: I saw some of the things I remember. And I think that's a beautiful progression in what
[Amit Varma]: is possible, as much as the two minute form is possible, the 30 second form is possible,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that is not necessarily a bad thing. At the same time, now, we can stretch out,
[Amit Varma]: you know, earlier it felt like an hour long interview is a deep dive. Today, it feels
[Amit Varma]: like micro content to me, at least as a consumer. Now we can stretch out. Now we can bring that
[Amit Varma]: herav into our viewing experience. And in a sense, what contradicts a question I ask
[Amit Varma]: or makes it moot in a certain sense is that, you know, you have long form content kind
[Amit Varma]: of flourishing like this. So what's your sense of it? Does it change the kind of art that
[Amit Varma]: is being produced? And does it also then in a positive way, change the kind of viewer
[Amit Varma]: because consumers are so high is clearly?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, well, you know, I mean, I agree completely. And this is what I'm saying is necessarily
[Guest 1]: going to be a little more theoretical than as opposed to sort of coming from first hand
[Guest 1]: understanding of it, because I haven't watched that many of these really long series myself.
[Guest 1]: I've seen enough of them to know that enough good ones to know that it's a very exciting
[Guest 1]: new development. This this especially this concept of the multi the multi season series
[Guest 1]: where you know, you have five, six seasons over five, six years, and yet you know that,
[Guest 1]: that the showrunners or the scriptwriters had a grand design in mind right from the
[Guest 1]: very beginning. You know, so this I keep hearing about this in the context of shows like Breaking
[Guest 1]: Bad and Better Call Saul, which I haven't seen myself, but I've heard enough about it
[Guest 1]: from from people whose whose judgment I respect, whose taste I respect to know that it's something
[Guest 1]: very special and that we really haven't had a precedent for this sort of thing done well
[Guest 1]: in the past. So yeah, so there is something to be said about that. But but I also do I
[Guest 1]: think I'm just coming back repeatedly not to the question of quality, whether it's something
[Guest 1]: that's that's a 60 episode show, or whether it's a two minute TikTok video or whatever
[Guest 1]: it is, I'm just coming back to the way in which people engage, you know, whether it's
[Guest 1]: it's something that you know, I know, I suppose it sort of depends on the sort of consumer
[Guest 1]: you are that that makes a difference. I still know even in today's day and age, I know,
[Guest 1]: I have friends, writers among them who managed to just switch off all social media, their
[Guest 1]: phones for hours on end when they have to sit down and read a novel for work or, or
[Guest 1]: whatever, or just for, for pleasure or something that you just need to do on a particular day.
[Guest 1]: So this was suppose that is still very much there. But on the whole, I suppose what I'm
[Guest 1]: just saying is that maybe it is a somewhat conservative position that just sort of dates
[Guest 1]: me in a way is that a lot of people I know a lot of young people in particular, do seem
[Guest 1]: to be taking on more than their minds can actually process in a single day, in terms
[Guest 1]: of the volume of content that's out there. And I see that when I see for instance, on
[Guest 1]: on Facebook, for instance, if I'm part of a film club forum where discussions are had
[Guest 1]: about films, it's very common for me to see people who are clearly very serious film buffs,
[Guest 1]: and who are keen to really engage with things, watch as many things as possible, but who
[Guest 1]: when they when they say something about a film about a particular film, you'll find
[Guest 1]: them saying something that just sort of that, that to my mind, at least just indicates a
[Guest 1]: very superficial takeaway, you know, you've just perhaps engaged with it at the level
[Guest 1]: of plot, you're saying something also that there's this tendency to, and perhaps there's
[Guest 1]: something I'm becoming more aware of, because I've been, I'm in the process of teaching.
[Guest 1]: And I've been doing that for a while, and I'm going to be doing it in a more consolidated
[Guest 1]: way from from next month, there seems to be this reluctance or inability to really research
[Guest 1]: something. So, so someone will someone who's clearly a very passionate film buff will watch
[Guest 1]: a new film that just come out, and will not even after watching it will not even take
[Guest 1]: the trouble to, to perhaps go to the Wikipedia page to sort of find out something about the
[Guest 1]: antecedents of the film, what it's based on what it might have been inspired by. So, so
[Guest 1]: for instance, there, there might be a film that that is a remake of an earlier film.
[Guest 1]: And this person will not know that at all, but will they write a long post on a film
[Guest 1]: film discussion forum, discussing the film almost exclusively in terms of its plot and
[Guest 1]: how it's so interesting, it's such a good film, because it's, it's such an such an original
[Guest 1]: story or whatever it is, without even realising that, that the plot is actually the least
[Guest 1]: original thing about it. It's, it's a direct remake of something that that happened 30-40
[Guest 1]: years ago. And that to my mind is a very surface way of engaging with things. I think I maybe
[Guest 1]: I just come from an old school thing where I need a lot of context for things. And I
[Guest 1]: need to sort of have that background, especially as a professional writer, when one is one
[Guest 1]: is actually putting your thoughts down about something you need to have a depth or breadth
[Guest 1]: of knowledge about, about the background of the work that you're writing about. So that's
[Guest 1]: maybe maybe that's what I'm talking about.
[Amit Varma]: I think maybe, you know, that distinction is not an intergenerational distinction, but
[Amit Varma]: just exists in the sense some people will always want depth and context and some people
[Amit Varma]: won't. But the difference today is that the shallow buggers are megaphones also, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because any, you know, apne zamane mein nahi tha, toh waisa. So now what is it to do? And
[Amit Varma]: I love the way you're talking about, you know, you're saying the young generation, they're
[Amit Varma]: not engaging. It's almost like you're telling all young people everywhere, tumse na ho paayega.
[Guest 1]: You know, so if any of your students know that, that that is, well, it's my bad to use
[Guest 1]: a to use a use a phrase that's much younger than I am. It's, it was, I think that, you
[Guest 1]: know, you're right, of course, it's it shouldn't be an age specific thing. And we will be,
[Guest 1]: we all know people of our own generation and older people older than us who, who have the
[Guest 1]: same unwillingness or inability to, to, to do those things. I think I'm just thinking
[Guest 1]: about a lot more because I'm, I'm engaging with or going to be engaging with students
[Guest 1]: of a certain age, who sort of who bristle at the idea that cinema existed before Christopher
[Guest 1]: Nolan made movies or whoever. So, so yeah. Actually, see, one, I mean, if you engage
[Guest 2]: with it, like the way Jai mentioned that, you know, understand the context, a little
[Guest 2]: bit of the history, the what where it is, you know, what were the antecedents of that
[Guest 2]: particular film and the story. Actually, you're, what you get out of that piece of art, you
[Guest 2]: know, increases tremendously. So, it's, you will just like it if you are getting deeper
[Guest 2]: into it. So, it's not about some kind of, you know, snobbery around just knowing more
[Guest 2]: about it, just improves your appreciation of art. And the other way of coming at it,
[Guest 2]: which is if you don't believe this, for instance, is that almost everyone who, whose art you
[Guest 2]: like, who's creating good, you know, even these long TV series and who's creating good
[Guest 2]: cinema today, you will notice that they were deeply steeped in the history of the kind
[Guest 2]: of work that they are doing. Always, it's, you know, Martin Scorsese knew every filmmaker
[Guest 2]: of the 50s and watched everything, right. And, you know, Tarantino knew everything about,
[Guest 2]: you know, whether it was French New Wave, or, you know, he knew everything, right. And
[Guest 2]: even today, if you, including Nolan, right. So, if these guys appreciate what that was,
[Guest 2]: right, and, and you have to respect the fact that they appreciated all of that, and therefore,
[Guest 2]: they are creating this work, which you all are, you know, thoroughly enjoying, and possibly
[Guest 2]: comparing more favorably with what has gone on in the past, then you should respect that
[Guest 2]: guys, you know, the person that you are really appreciating their taste. And maybe give that
[Guest 2]: benefit of doubt that we should go back and understand what was happening at that point
[Guest 2]: in time, because they seem to be coming off a particular chain. And maybe there is something
[Guest 2]: more to be done there. In fact, that's how, at least in my case, you know, it's not, I
[Guest 2]: mean, in some cases, it has been random, you know, jump into someone. But in many cases,
[Guest 2]: it's been this kind, you know, you read somewhere, some Coen brother interview and mentions Preston
[Guest 2]: Sturges, and you're like, yeah, man, I love these guys. I mean, these guys, for me at
[Guest 2]: a particular time in, you know, early 2000s, and it was like, I mean, Coen brother toh
[Guest 2]: kuch bhi karega, purana, apneya, sab jaake dhoond ke dekho. So, why are these guys talking
[Guest 2]: about someone who was like, 50 years before this time and in such favorable terms. And
[Guest 2]: so, then you go back to, you know, Sturges, and then you say that, okay, by mistake, maine
[Guest 2]: ek picture dekh liya tha. I don't even remember, Ball of Fire or something I'd watched. And
[Guest 2]: then you figure out, you know, that the Lady Eve or what, and then you realize ki kya,
[Guest 2]: as a scriptwriter, kamaal tha. I mean, you know, the guy could do, you know, really great
[Guest 2]: script, really tight. I mean, he had a fairly short sort of, you know, real dramatic peak
[Guest 2]: for 5-6 years. He just wrote, you know, these next level screwball comedy stuff, you know,
[Guest 2]: the banter, the back and forth. So, yeah, so then you discover that, then you discover
[Guest 2]: it. I mean, then you find more, then you get deeper into it, then you realize you've never
[Guest 2]: fully appreciated Barbara Steinweg, then you go down Barbara Steinweg path, and you know,
[Guest 2]: you get so much out of that stuff. So, I, you know, you will be richer from, you know,
[Guest 2]: the deeper dive is my sense. I mean, you'll be richer by much more than what you do.
[Guest 1]: You know, I just want to want to say again, as someone who, I think we may have discussed
[Guest 1]: this before someone who for whom it happened very randomly, my own journey into really
[Guest 1]: old cinema, including cinema that was made decades before I was born, had just happened
[Guest 1]: when I was an adolescent. And I mean, through a series of events that even I can't completely
[Guest 1]: make sense of, you know, where you just sort of, you know, you just become interested,
[Guest 1]: you have an aunt somewhere who has some cassettes of 1950s films, you overhear a conversation
[Guest 1]: between your mother and one of her friends and, or you sort of see Laurence Olivier's
[Guest 1]: obituary in the newspaper in 1989, in July 1989, front page Times of India, become intrigued
[Guest 1]: kid, you know, a non-Indian actor on the front page of the Times of India or whatever it
[Guest 1]: is. There's so many things that can go into this process. I have to clarify since I always
[Guest 1]: sort of, you know, I get, you know, in my own circles, I get pigeonholed as someone
[Guest 1]: who's always insisting that you should see older stuff, you should make these deep dives
[Guest 1]: into all sorts of things that I have all the sympathy in the world for people, young people,
[Guest 1]: people my own age, whatever, who simply cannot find the time to do this, because there's
[Guest 1]: so much brilliant stuff, as you pointed out, just now, as we were talking just now, that's,
[Guest 1]: that's happening in the here and now the content that has been made in the last three days
[Amit Varma]: or whatever it is, or the last five years, I didn't mean to indicate it was brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: I meant to indicate it's addictive, but whatever, I mean, it can be both, you know, talking
[Guest 1]: about stuff like Breaking Bad or The Wire or whatever, also talking about those things
[Guest 1]: as well. There's so much. So I have a lot of sympathy for people, including people who
[Guest 1]: are, you know, trying to be professional film writers, I know, you know, some of the finest
[Guest 1]: film critics in the country right now, and I know, because I know some of them personally
[Guest 1]: are people who barely have any knowledge of pre 1970s cinema, and they are aware of it
[Guest 1]: and they feel a bit handicapped by it, but here they are with, with multiple deadlines
[Guest 1]: every week, you know, with multiple films to watch, new films to watch just for work,
[Guest 1]: where does one find the time to, to go back and explore films of the 20s, 30s, in a consolidated
[Guest 1]: structured way where you can really educate yourself in a, in a meaningful way. So that's
[Guest 1]: why I get that completely. It's just that I do, I do feel that, that inevitably there
[Guest 1]: will be a sense of loss if you don't have that, have some historical background, you
[Guest 1]: are going to be missing out on a lot of stuff, you know. So, so for instance, I was just,
[Guest 1]: just to take one example. And what you said, you know, is, is of course, right, but I have
[Guest 1]: to say that Martin Scorsese is such an outlier when it comes to these things that he should
[Unknown]: never be used as an example for anything. He's the sort of guy who will, you know, you'll
[Guest 1]: name any film to him, you know, you're interviewing him, and you name any film made between 1910
[Guest 1]: and 1970. And he'll, he'll say, Oh, I've seen that one 30 times or something.
[Amit Varma]: Have you interviewed him?
[Guest 1]: No, I haven't. I mean, I'm fine. In my dreams, in my dreams. So I've, so he's, he's, he's
[Guest 1]: not the best example for this sort of thing. I do know lots of contemporary Indian directors
[Guest 1]: and scriptwriters who are steeped in, you know, they are aware of stuff that has happened
[Guest 1]: before, but many of them, a large percentage of them, in my experience, seem to really
[Guest 1]: have sort of seem to seem to feel like the important stuff in film history really started
[Guest 1]: in the 1970s with the with the kids in with the kids with beards in the US with the Scorsese
[Guest 1]: Coppola generation. And they are definitely lacking on the whole, in knowledge about about
[Guest 1]: the period that you mentioned the Preston Sturges period, the period of the 1940s, or
[Guest 1]: the 50s, and American cinema, for instance, which I think is one of the great, great for
[Guest 1]: great founts of, of everything. And, and, of course, the what we call world cinema from
[Guest 1]: the 1950s. There is that lacking to some that I know, I know lots of Indian scriptwriters,
[Guest 1]: directors, who are working on some very good web series or films or have been in the last
[Guest 1]: few years who just whose film education begins with the 1970s. It doesn't go back before
[Guest 2]: that. So that is there also. That's a it's a great decade to still start
[Unknown]: with. Coppola, De Palma, it's a great decade, but then as Scorsese, who was a central figure
[Guest 1]: in that decade keeps saying, you know, we stood on the shoulders of giants, you know,
[Guest 1]: and and and people, you know, if you're trying to appreciate our work, in a deep way, you
[Guest 1]: have to sort of go further back, and then then further back beyond that. That's definitely
[Guest 2]: at least a lot of them just had such strong Hitchcockian hangover. De Palma for sure.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, Subrata, we'll come back to your story after the break, because you actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, knew a lot of the protagonists in the Indian film scene, you wanted to be a
[Amit Varma]: filmmaker yourself. But we'll come to that after the break. One final big question before
[Amit Varma]: the break, which sort of takes off from what you were just talking about. Howard Bloom
[Amit Varma]: has a book called How to Read and Why, right? And, and I'm very curious about how you guys
[Amit Varma]: would answer the question of how to watch a film and why. And I don't mean this in a
[Amit Varma]: prescriptive sense, ki bachcho ko batao, ki, you know, ye points hai, ye aapko likhna hai,
[Amit Varma]: ye karna hai, not like that. But just in a sense of the first time we watch a film, we
[Amit Varma]: are as children, we are watching the film as you know, it's a linear narrative, it's
[Amit Varma]: a story you're interested ye hua, iske baad ye hua, so on and so forth. But later layers
[Amit Varma]: begin to form, you begin to see more in the film, layers form in your own head and of
[Amit Varma]: how you watch it and the different things that you look for and the different connections
[Amit Varma]: that you make, and so on. And there are also other layers which you may or may not engage
[Amit Varma]: with what the filmmaker intended, where is he coming from, and even everything you just
[Amit Varma]: described, the giants on whose shoulders, you know, she may stand. So, in terms of just
[Amit Varma]: that experience of watching a film, and not necessarily watching it to write a review
[Amit Varma]: ki aap notes le rahe ho, ki ye likhna hai, ye likhna hai, ye likhna hai, but just you're
[Amit Varma]: watching a film for pleasure, you know, how has that changed over the years in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you guys look at cinema?
[Guest 1]: Again, it's difficult to really say, I think it probably works differently for different
[Guest 1]: people. You know, one of the reasons why I ended up becoming a professional film critic
[Guest 1]: or someone who was interested in recording his feelings about films from a very early
[Guest 1]: age going right back to, you know, the age of nine or 10, when I was just scribbling
[Guest 1]: things randomly on notepads about my favourite Amitabh Bachchan films or whatever it is,
[Guest 1]: giving them star ratings, which is something that's pretty amusing, because I'm so disdainful
[Guest 1]: about star ratings and, and these rankings, like, like you were,
[Amit Varma]: You were giving star ratings to stars. So they were star star ratings.
[Guest 1]: Star star ratings. Yes, yes. Well, stars and their films. So when you have that particular
[Guest 1]: imperative, that's something very just a few people have, right? I mean, most people, bless
[Guest 1]: their souls, because I feel very envious of them are just content to watch a film, you
[Guest 1]: know, with enthusiasm without, you know, necessarily getting cerebral or, or, or even putting down
[Guest 1]: thoughts about it. In fact, some of some of my friends who I'm most envious of in this
[Guest 1]: regard are massive film buffs who can who can have these incredibly informed and intelligent
[Guest 1]: conversations about cinema, but who don't have that, that writerly impulse at all, that
[Guest 1]: day that they would they want to sit down and put it down. And I've had that for as
[Guest 1]: far back as I can remember. So then someone like that, when when you when you're watching
[Guest 1]: a film, inevitably, you are sort of trying at some conscious level to pick up on certain
[Guest 1]: things also, depending at what stage in your development you are, as a as a film watcher.
[Guest 1]: Of course, it's true that I think it's true for the vast majority of us, that that our
[Guest 1]: first point of engagement with a film is purely at the level of what happens next, what happens
[Guest 1]: at the plot level, actors, stars, I think a majority of us as initial film buffs, and
[Guest 1]: maybe even through a lifetime of film watching are most interested in the people on the screen,
[Guest 1]: and you know, and you know, and developing certain sort of affinities with star personalities,
[Guest 1]: projecting their own feelings onto them, which is which is why we have the phenomenon of
[Guest 1]: the big movie star, who may or may not also be a very good actor. Really, there's, I don't
[Guest 1]: think there can be any one one size fits all answer to a question like this. It just depends
[Guest 1]: on, you know, what stage of your film development you're at. Now, today, if I were to watch
[Guest 1]: a film, even if I'm not writing about it on a deadline, chances are that my mind is sufficiently
[Guest 1]: trained to, on the one hand, pay attention to what's happening at the plot level to sort
[Guest 1]: of follow what's happening and to be stimulated by that, ab kya hone wala hai, etc. Assuming
[Guest 1]: that I don't already know much about the film beforehand, but also picking up on little
[Guest 1]: things at the level of cinematography, sound design, etc. Or at least deriving some enjoyment
[Guest 1]: from how a well made film is bringing all its elements together and putting them at
[Guest 1]: the service of creating the experience. So just to give you one example of this very
[Guest 1]: recent Malayalam film called Malayan Kunju, which is a Fahad Fasil film. And he's already
[Guest 1]: quite a big name, even among non South Indian viewers who are seeking out Malayalam and
[Guest 1]: Tamil cinema. It's a film about this character played by Fahad, who is bitter and he's resentful
[Guest 1]: for various reasons, he's not very happy inside. And then around midway through the film, he
[Guest 1]: finds himself caught in a landslide, and then it becomes a survival film. And I was watching
[Guest 1]: it even though I watched it on a laptop screen, unfortunately, I wish I could have seen it
[Guest 1]: on the big screen, I missed it. I watched it on a laptop screen with the full earphones
[Guest 1]: plugged in. And while I was very engaged with the story, because it is an engaging story,
[Guest 1]: you want to know what's going to happen to him from one step to the other. At one point,
[Guest 1]: I also found myself really reveling in the sound design of the film, because he's a large
[Guest 1]: part of the second half of the film, he's trapped underwater or somewhere in a cave
[Guest 1]: below where his house used to be. And there's a sound of a baby wailing in the far distance,
[Guest 1]: which is a pivotal plot point in the film, a child who used to feel very disturbed by,
[Guest 1]: but who now sort of becomes like this something for him to hold on to an oral experience for
[Guest 1]: him to, you know, to remember that there's a world out there that he has to try and get
[Guest 1]: back to. And I became really fascinated by the sound design of the film. And aware, while
[Guest 1]: I was immersed in the film, I was also aware that this is what the sound designer and the
[Guest 1]: director what they've done this, what they've constructed to heighten the experience of
[Guest 1]: the film. Just one example, you can apply that to cinematography, you can apply that
[Guest 1]: to editing, background music, whatever. So really, that's, it varies. It also also varies
[Guest 1]: depending on the type of film it is that there are films that are that are not narrative
[Guest 1]: films at all the anti narrative films. There's, you know, if you watch a Goddard film from
[Guest 1]: the 60s, which is, which is not about telling a story in a linear way, or even about telling
[Guest 1]: any sort of story, sometimes, you're sort of looking at it and, and trying to sort of,
[Guest 1]: you know, pick up on elements of, you know, the atmosphere created by the film, the perspective
[Guest 1]: that is being expressed, the little playful things he's doing at the level of forming
[Guest 1]: it, and maybe it won't be immersive. For you, as a viewer to be more about actually sitting
[Guest 1]: and being more analytical throughout the thing. What is he doing? What, what camera angle
[Guest 1]: has he chosen here? Why is he just sort of why is he got a camera fixed on this person
[Guest 1]: for five minutes, or on this coffee cup with the coffee swirling inside, you know, standing
[Guest 1]: for the cosmos or whatever it is, you start thinking, thinking, thinking about those things.
[Guest 1]: It depends on the type of film, the depends on whether you're writing about it, whether
[Guest 1]: you're watching it primarily for relaxation. So many things.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, see, I think one way to look at this is, you know, if you consume something
[Guest 2]: in fairly regular and large quantities, you start then figuring out what is good or not.
[Guest 2]: It's just natural. I mean, you know, I love biryani. And over a period of time since I've
[Guest 2]: eaten so many biryani, the first morsel is enough. And it's very difficult to explain
[Guest 2]: what's going on in your mind the minute you eat the first morsel, but you know, and even
[Guest 2]: if there are different types of biryani within them, I know the difference. I mean, the macro
[Guest 2]: difference is potato, but the micro difference is something very different. And then you
[Guest 2]: have it, you realize this Kolkata biryani is better than the other one. And so might
[Guest 2]: be the case with the Mopla biryani or the, you know, the various kinds of rice that they
[Guest 2]: use in the talap katti biryani or the dindigul biryani. So one is if you watch a lot of it,
[Guest 2]: you automatically something, you know, you get in your head in terms of how you are able
[Guest 2]: to appreciate that. So that's definitely happened with me. So in the absence of any formal sort
[Guest 2]: of learning or anything of that kind, it happened. And I'll tell you some very simple things
[Guest 2]: like you know, you watch Mukkaddar ka Sikandar. And many people watch it. And sometimes I
[Guest 2]: tell them that actually it is Devdas. People completely find it, you know, as a revelation
[Guest 2]: ki yeh Devdas ka story hai. Because, you know, they've just watched it. But when you just
[Guest 2]: explain it to them, it's the same thing. There is one, you know, Paro and then, you know,
[Guest 2]: the Rekha's character is a dancer, is a courtesan, she's Chandramukhi and it's exactly the same.
[Guest 2]: There is Churnilal in the form of Inod Khanna. Chalo Amjad Khan aajaata hai and so on and
[Guest 2]: so forth. And last mein mar jaata hai. And on the, you know, dies next to Rakhi and stuff.
[Guest 2]: That only happens if you, you know, after sort of while watching it, you have watched
[Guest 2]: so many films that you're not just watching it, you're just trying to make some sort of
[Guest 2]: a meta connect about, you know, what the story is and what does this sort of, you know, is
[Guest 2]: this similar to some other pattern or some other kind of similar story. And that's at
[Guest 2]: that level. Forget, like, Jai was mentioning the soundscape and, you know, the camera angles,
[Guest 2]: etc. will come later. Sometimes people just miss the very obvious plot itself. It seems
[Guest 2]: very, because you just watch and come out of it, right? So that's, so that's, like,
[Guest 2]: that's one thing. And I see this even in reading, right? I mean, you, all of us sort of first
[Guest 2]: started off with harka phulka reading, you know, we did the Woodhouse and the Agatha
[Guest 2]: Christie's and all that. And even there, by the 10th, Agatha Christie, you start appreciating
[Guest 2]: how firstly intricate it is, who's saying what, etc, etc. And by the time you are in
[Guest 2]: the 12th or 13th, you are trying to guess because you now figured out how she sort of
[Guest 2]: leaves red earrings and clues and things of that kind. Same with Woodhouse. I mean, those
[Guest 2]: plots might be farcical and silly, but very intricate. I mean, and everything falls in
[Guest 2]: place at the end, right? And in very sort of funny and in a twisted sort of logical
[Guest 2]: way, but you know, it falls in place. So I think if you just consume more, you will find
[Guest 2]: it and you might not be able to articulate it, but often you'll find it. So that's sort
[Guest 2]: of one way of looking at it. The second is then, you know, one of the things that came
[Guest 2]: to me over a period of time is just the way the director is showing you the film, right?
[Guest 2]: Not just you as a viewer watching it. I mean, you know, he could have placed the camera
[Guest 2]: here, or he could have taken it up and shown you a different view. What does that do to
[Guest 2]: your viewing experience? You know, and same with, you know, the sound and when you start
[Guest 2]: realizing that, you know, he's actually or she's actually, you know, playing God, I mean,
[Guest 2]: they're actually taking you through this, how they want you to experience that particular
[Guest 2]: scene. And that, I think, that was a moment of sort of, you know, revelation that I, I
[Guest 2]: mean, I, with some directors, I started realizing that there is something at work here that
[Guest 2]: you, they are in some sense manipulating or in some sense, they want you to watch the,
[Guest 2]: you know, drama unfolding in a certain way. And that once you've seen that, then you can't
[Guest 2]: unsee it. I mean, in the sense you just, you know, next time you're watching a film, you're
[Guest 2]: doing it both as a viewer and sometimes also as how you are being, you know, you're being
[Guest 2]: asked to view it. And then of course, that plus the sort of there is always a subtext
[Guest 2]: or sometimes a subtext or a meta narrative of in every film. I mean, even if the director
[Guest 2]: sometimes is not fully thinking about it, you as a viewer can appreciate and take away.
[Guest 2]: And often I've realized, even if it is Prakash Mehra in Mukaddar Ka Sikandar, boss, he's
[Guest 2]: thinking about it. He's figured that it is Devdasi Banarao. But he's also thinking at
[Guest 2]: multiple levels the way, the reason he names the character Sikandar, who's technically
[Guest 2]: means, you know, unconquered or whatever, cannot be defeated. But then, you know, loses
[Guest 2]: in love. Kar raha hai boss, wo Prakash Mehra hai, par wo poora dimaag laga raha hai, including
[Guest 2]: naming the character in a certain way and, you know, all of that. And then of course,
[Guest 2]: with better filmmakers and like one of the films among many rare films, I just love Nayak.
[Guest 2]: One is, you know, it's just, it's in its own way, contained sort of environment film, right?
[Guest 2]: They're all in the, in the train, you know, in that single compartment. There is Sharmila
[Guest 2]: Tagore, who is not taken in by these guys, you know, the fandom or whatever, the fact
[Guest 2]: that he's a celebrity, the fact that she can, you know, critically ask him questions that
[Guest 2]: makes him go back and, you know, think and reflect about the journey that he's had. You
[Guest 2]: realize then that, you know, at a general level, it's a story of somebody sitting there
[Guest 2]: and she's there and you're seeing a little bit of chemistry, but she's also asking him
[Guest 2]: some questions, he's thinking about it. But then after some time, you realize that it's
[Guest 2]: a genuinely a deeper examination of, you know, success, also of, you know, the fact that
[Guest 2]: you are a celebrity and how do you personally, you know, what do you have to deal with, you
[Guest 2]: know, thinking about the compromises you have made, so on and so forth. And then you get
[Guest 2]: a better appreciation of, you know, how the filmmaker has, you know, put that thing together.
[Guest 2]: So I mean, like I said, you know, there are just these two, three things at least that
[Guest 2]: I can articulate that sort of opens your mind to it, you know, just the idea of is there
[Guest 2]: something more where you can connect the plot to the story to how the director wants you
[Guest 2]: to see it. And, you know, and then once you figure that out, it's how the, you know, what
[Guest 2]: are the deeper questions or, you know, things that the director is asking. And after some
[Guest 2]: time, you sometimes start overthinking it, maybe even the director is not doing it. But
[Guest 2]: you're like, why did he or she wear something there of that kind? And, you know, all of
[Guest 2]: that, then, why did they suddenly show, why was it raining at that point in time, and
[Guest 2]: so on and so forth. So, and then you build your own, you know, context and narrative.
[Guest 2]: But again, it's fairly enriching. And then if you start seeing a body of work of a director
[Guest 2]: of you then find that there is, then you see that there is even more a pattern because
[Guest 1]: that guy is doing something similar for a period of time. Yeah, that's, that's a very
[Guest 1]: important, I was about to come to that, that, you know, if you're talking about the process
[Guest 1]: of watching films, how does one watch films, then of course, another important factor is
[Guest 1]: you watch multiple films made by the same director or even featuring the same actor,
[Guest 1]: or the same cinematographer, you know, music director who has a certain part to play in
[Guest 1]: the in the making of the film, you start seeing patterns as well, right. And of course, some
[Guest 1]: of those patterns might just be coming as you know, from from your, your own projections
[Guest 1]: and overthinking, over reading or whatever you want to call it. Though, as you know,
[Guest 1]: I'm also a big fan of subtextual analysis taken as far as it can go. I just also wanted
[Guest 1]: to just interject and this is the sort of thing that happens, this serendipitous sort
[Guest 1]: of thing that happens when movie buffs are just sitting and talking, right. Complete
[Guest 1]: coincidence this morning, I was actually writing something about Mukadarka Sikandar. You know,
[Guest 1]: as part of an essay about Prakash Mehra and Bachchan. And I just wanted to add to what
[Guest 1]: you said, you know, yeah, you know, it's not just is it, is it very much a Devdas film?
[Guest 1]: It's also one of the most interesting Devdas films we've had, because it may be the only
[Guest 1]: one where across the many Indian cultures, where the man is not laying this heavy guilt
[Guest 1]: trip on the woman, on the woman who, you know, who doesn't reciprocate his, you know, so
[Guest 1]: one of the moving things about that film for me is the relationship, the fact that the
[Guest 1]: Bachchan character, even though Rakhi, the Rakhi character, we want to call her the Paro,
[Guest 1]: Paro like figure, she doesn't, you know, it's unrequited love, she doesn't reciprocate.
[Guest 1]: He never stops feeling grateful to her and beholden to her in a sense, because of, at
[Guest 1]: a purely platonic level, what she did for him when he was a child. And that, that devotion
[Guest 1]: is always there, that that that acknowledgement is there. It doesn't really, it doesn't devolve
[Guest 1]: into, you know, I'm the, I'm the angsty male who's been rebuffed, and I'm going to put
[Guest 1]: this major guilt trip on the woman, it doesn't turn into that. So it's quite an unusual Devdas
[Guest 1]: in that sense.
[Guest 2]: Prakash Mehra, by the way, along with Qadar Khan, he used to make a Bachchan film only
[Guest 2]: to put some dialogues, I think. So, I mean, there's this film called Lavarees, I mean,
[Guest 2]: all of us, you know, Mere Angne Mein and all of that. Lavarees to sometimes I think is
[Guest 2]: just a vehicle for Qadar Khan to, you know, just take a, you know, just dalo yaar, dialogues
[Guest 2]: dalo. You know, Amitabh is standing in a queue. This is like the daily wage labour kind of
[Guest 2]: guy, you go there, the Munimji always unis perves, there isn't character. He's sitting
[Guest 2]: there, right? And that when Amitabh reaches there, that guy asks naam, Amitabh says Heera.
[Guest 2]: And that guy says Baap Ka Naam, Amitabh says Kaam Main Karunga Hai Mera Baap. There is
[Guest 2]: the other one, where he says, there's some, you know, reference to, you won't, Tum Sudhar
[Guest 2]: Jao or something he says, right? There's this Ranjeet character to Amitabh. He says, Apan
[Guest 2]: Wo Kutte Ka Pooj Ki Tara Hai, Jise Bara Saal Ek Nadi Mein Dal Do, Nadi Teda Ho Jayega, Par
[Amit Varma]: Pooj Sida Nahi Hoga. Excellent. On that note, let's go in for a quick break. But before
[Amit Varma]: we do so, a question for my listeners, and you'll get the answer on the other side of
[Amit Varma]: the break, which is that there is a certain subset of films starring Amitabh Bachchan and
[Amit Varma]: Pran, in which the character plays by Pran dies, but the character plays by Amitabh does
[Amit Varma]: not. So, you know, what phrase would you use for that subset of films? We'll see you after
[Amit Varma]: a short break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150, and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm sitting, I'm chatting with Jayarjun Singh
[Amit Varma]: and Subrat Mohanty and the answer to the question of that subset of films, where the character
[Amit Varma]: plays by Pran dies with the character plays by Amitabhji doesn't die, is Pran jaye par
[Amit Varma]: bachchan na jaye. Now, having got that out of the way.
[Guest 2]: There are a couple of films that I can think of on the top of my mind.
[Guest 2]: Which ones?
[Guest 2]: Well, one I think is Dawn. The other one is a movie called Machboor where Amitabh has
[Guest 2]: this brain tumor.
[Guest 1]: He doesn't actually.
[Guest 2]: But he doesn't, but he goes to the jail because he has to do something. Whatever, Farida Jalal
[Guest 2]: and all that. But there also I think Pran is there and eventually Pran dies. Bachchan
[Guest 2]: doesn't. And in Dawn, one Bachchan dies, but other one doesn't. So Pran jaye, ek Bachchan
[Guest 2]: rahe, ek Bachchan jaye.
[Guest 1]: That's too complicated.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it reminds me of that, you know, Sushant Singh Rajput and quantum theory. You guys
[Amit Varma]: know about that, right? You don't know about this? Jai doesn't know about this. So I don't
[Guest 1]: know about anything that happened post 1940.
[Unknown]: By the way, we are a free country.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we are. Correct. You are independent. But do you still have a mybabs state? Actually?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. I mean, I don't know if you're a free country.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. So basically, one of the conspiracy theories around Sushant Singh Rajput's death
[Amit Varma]: was that he was into quantum mechanics, apparently. And he once tweeted about some phenomenon in
[Amit Varma]: quantum mechanics where an atom is split into two. So there's two versions of the same atom,
[Amit Varma]: some shit like that. So the theory was that he had used that Sushant to split himself
[Amit Varma]: into two. And the one who died was a duplicate Sushant Singh Rajput. And the real one was
[Amit Varma]: still alive. And then there are different versions of this theory. But the one I remember
[Amit Varma]: is that he was in hiding because Adityanath was looking for him because he had invented
[Amit Varma]: the treatment for COVID or some shit like that. I'll just link it. It's incredible.
[Guest 1]: It sounds plausible. I hope his fans start a giant movement to address this.
[Unknown]: Listen, they did.
[Unknown]: Kronenberg ko bolo yaar. Banayega kuch.
[Amit Varma]: Kronenberg banayega kuch. So the next question comes from that, you know, interesting point
[Amit Varma]: you raised, Subrata, about, you know, that when you're watching a film, it's not just
[Amit Varma]: what you are bringing to it, but you're also thinking about the director's intentionality.
[Amit Varma]: Now I had this conversation with Varun in my episode with him, which you haven't heard
[Amit Varma]: because it's not released, but it'll be released well before yours, of course, where I asked
[Amit Varma]: him about the ending of Masaan, right? Beautiful film. And the film, of course, and I, since
[Amit Varma]: I've already given the spoiler away in my episode with Varun, I can just do it again.
[Amit Varma]: But essentially, there are these two parallel tracks of these two people who have loved
[Amit Varma]: and lost in different ways. And at the end, they are on the steps at the ghats of the
[Amit Varma]: river. And that's the first time you see them in one frame. And it's a beautiful moment.
[Amit Varma]: And I would have ended the film there. Now, how a typical Bollywood treatment of the film
[Amit Varma]: would have been is that you show them talking, coming together, all kinds of things happen,
[Amit Varma]: they get married happily ever after. Basically, you spell everything out. The way Neeraj and
[Amit Varma]: Varun treated it is that they talk to each other briefly, and they get on a boat, and
[Amit Varma]: then the boat sails away. And then there's a song where the first two lines of the lyric
[Amit Varma]: indicate something to the effect of life not ending the world continuing, which spells
[Amit Varma]: it out a little more than I would have, but in an elusive way. And it's not as you know,
[Amit Varma]: the Bollywood kind of thing. And what's and I of course, as you know, Jai, we discussed
[Amit Varma]: it last time, I sort of have a bias towards, you know, being allowed to think for myself
[Amit Varma]: and not being spoon fed in the typical Bollywood way would be spoon fed you in every way, you
[Amit Varma]: know, show you everything that happens, put background music that forces you to feel in
[Amit Varma]: a particular way, all of that. And I remember Jai, you pointed out that one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: films, Moonlight actually does have a lot of interesting background music happening,
[Amit Varma]: which therefore seems to go against what I'm saying. So I one, I'm wondering if it is simply
[Amit Varma]: a question of taste? Or is it the case that as you watch more and more movies, you sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, sometimes you might be in the state of mind where you're completely passive.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, there seems to be a continuum along complete passivity, where you're not
[Amit Varma]: thinking for yourself, and a little bit of involvement where you are using your own imagination
[Amit Varma]: and putting two and two together. And it seems to me that and perhaps it's my bias speaking,
[Amit Varma]: but that the more powerful kind of art is where you allow the reader or the viewer to
[Amit Varma]: be a participant in the sense of that and, you know, not kind of spoon feed them. So
[Amit Varma]: and that changes the nature of the art that that plays to what the viewer might be wanting
[Amit Varma]: at that moment. What are your feelings about this? Am I?
[Guest 1]: I don't know, I feel like there are different ways of being a participant.
[Amit Varma]: If you remember the film, how would you have ended it? By the way, just curious.
[Amit Varma]: I was fine with the way it ended.
[Amit Varma]: It ended beautifully. But I thought just I would have pulled it back just a little bit
[Amit Varma]: even more. But I mean, it's a great film. Absolutely great film.
[Guest 1]: No, no, no, I was fine with the way I mean, I actually watched it when it came out and
[Guest 1]: didn't remember it very clearly. But then you described this quite vividly just now.
[Guest 1]: So yeah, so then I remembered I was fine with the way it ended. I sort of agree that, that
[Guest 1]: if it would for that film for given what the film had already been for this entire duration,
[Guest 1]: it would have been a big misstep to turn it into a Bollywood, Bollywoodized, as you put
[Guest 1]: it spoon feeding sort of ending that that would have been a that wouldn't have worked
[Guest 1]: for me at all for this film, for this particular film.
[Guest 1]: I don't know what you suggested, what you proposed, I suppose that could work also,
[Guest 1]: it would obviously be be even more subtle and spare could have worked.
[Guest 1]: The thing is, I don't actually sort of remember the experience of Masaan very clearly right
[Guest 1]: now to really but but yeah, I think I think definitely not the hyper Bollywoodized version
[Guest 1]: that that that would definitely not have worked for that film.
[Guest 1]: What I was saying was, there are different ways of being a participant also right now,
[Guest 1]: you know, when I get your point about spoon feeding, or about, you know, an insistent
[Guest 1]: music score underlining things seeming to play your emotions seeming to sort of tell
[Guest 1]: you what what to feel, but, and again, I suppose this maybe this is different for different
[Guest 1]: types of viewers, you know, it works differently.
[Guest 1]: The point about moonlighting, moonlight, by the way, was that that I felt like, like it
[Guest 1]: had a lovely, lush music score, it could entirely I haven't gone back to see the film a second
[Guest 1]: time, it could entirely be that that that maybe when I was watching it, for some reason,
[Guest 1]: for whatever reason, the score just sort of, you know, just imposed itself on me or I paid
[Guest 1]: extra attention to it, whereas, objectively speaking, it may not even have been a very
[Guest 1]: insistent score, maybe it was just the right score for that film.
[Guest 1]: But I liked it so much that it that that it played a part, especially in the dialogue
[Guest 1]: less portions of the film, such as the swimming pool scene, or things like that, it affected
[Guest 1]: me and and maybe you watched it and the music didn't even sort of feel insistent to you.
[Guest 1]: So, so it's two different people responding to it.
[Guest 1]: To come back to what I was saying, I think even though, you know, a film that that might
[Guest 1]: seem to you to be a case of a lot of spoon feeding the viewer, just making the viewer
[Guest 1]: passive as you say, and you know, and just the film constantly telling you what to do.
[Guest 1]: There is a part of participative process in that as well.
[Guest 1]: Now, you know, if you look at if I look at some of my favourite masala Hindi films of
[Guest 1]: a past era, including the big, brassy musical numbers and things, I feel like I'm part of
[Guest 1]: participating in a different way if I if I see a lovely song sequence that I'm really
[Guest 1]: enjoying with a big star or three big stars Amar Akbar Anthony, all on the screen, I feel
[Guest 1]: like I like I am, you know, just just by virtue of enjoying the way it's done, the the stars
[Guest 1]: on the screen, my own projections of who these people are, Bachchan, Vinod Khanna, Rishi
[Guest 1]: Kapoor, Rishi Kapoor, whatever, I feel like I am there, some part of me some, you know,
[Guest 1]: some closet, extroverted, boisterous part of me is up there with them, you know, perhaps
[Guest 1]: performing with them, you know, just defeating the villains through the power of song or
[Guest 1]: whatever.
[Guest 1]: So that is a different sort of participation as well.
[Guest 1]: It's not just like, to me, at least it's not like, I'm just sitting back in the seat and
[Guest 1]: you know, and Manmohan Desai is just sort of feeding me mishti doi or whatever and I'm
[Guest 1]: just sort of just gulping it down without, without thinking about it, which is one of
[Guest 1]: the reasons why I get a little defensive when when people use words like mindless, mindless
[Guest 1]: entertainment for for mainstream films, because to me, or when when they say, oh, you know,
[Guest 1]: you do by the default assumption is that with a Manmohan Desai film, you know, you just
[Guest 1]: sort of you're just it's it doesn't require, you can sort of watch it leaving your brains
[Guest 1]: at home or whatever.
[Guest 1]: I need my brain for everything.
[Guest 1]: I need my brain.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I'd be very afraid of misplacing it.
[Guest 1]: I need to have it in here for every sort of experience, whether it's the the Tarkovsky
[Guest 1]: experience or the Manmohan Desai experience, there are different forms of engagement.
[Guest 1]: And I don't really, I've never seen myself as a passive viewer with any film that I've
[Guest 1]: truly enjoyed, no matter what category of film it is.
[Amit Varma]: Image of Manmohan Desai spoon feeding you is, won't leave my mind for a while.
[Guest 1]: It would be the Sarulak in 1978.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I don't know what Manmohanji would have made of that.
[Amit Varma]: But but I buy your point.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in a sense, everything is spoon feeding to an extent, because every choice has been
[Amit Varma]: made for a reason.
[Amit Varma]: Camera yaha hai, waha nahi hai, that itself has been made for a reason.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess it's a question of degrees and quibbling and, you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Subrata, what's your take on it?
[Amit Varma]: Because you watch the because you are a lover of both the most overstated Bollywood films
[Amit Varma]: as well as the most understated and quote unquote, realistic international films.
[Amit Varma]: How do like, do you have to mode shift from one to the other to appreciate them as they
[Amit Varma]: are meant to be appreciated?
[Guest 2]: Or how does it work?
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: So I think, you know, just picking on picking up from where Jay left, one of the things
[Guest 2]: that should be there is just the within the film itself, it should have, you know, integrity,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: So that it should not be uneven within the film, because that's, then you know that you
[Guest 2]: are in for this experience, and the director is giving you all of that.
[Guest 2]: And he's not, you know, thematically not, you know, sort of going in different directions
[Guest 2]: within the same film.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's very important, because then you can enjoy it, you know, just as a
[Guest 2]: single piece of work.
[Guest 2]: So, like Jay mentioned on Masaan, you were watching a certain sensibility right through
[Guest 2]: the film.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, the ending could not have been a different one, and maybe you could quibble
[Guest 2]: about, could they have pulled back a little bit more, I think where they left it was,
[Guest 2]: in some sense, still consistent with the overall sensibility that the film had.
[Guest 2]: And then therefore, Manmohan Desai is completely consistent, right?
[Guest 2]: And therefore, not mindless at all.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, people don't appreciate, there was a time in 76, four Manmohan Desai
[Guest 2]: films were running at the same time.
[Guest 2]: I don't know when the guy made those four films together.
[Guest 1]: Which ones?
[Guest 1]: There was Chacha Bhatija, Parvaresh, Shama, Amar Akbar, Antony and Dharamveer.
[Guest 2]: So it would have been 77 actually.
[Guest 2]: 77.
[Guest 2]: All four films.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, it was like a combination of characters, I mean, it was same, there was
[Guest 2]: Amitabh, there was Vinod Khanna, in somewhere there was Dharmendra, somewhere there was
[Guest 2]: Randhir Kapoor and Dharmendra, Chacha Bhatija.
[Guest 2]: So all different films.
[Guest 2]: I remember watching these films at different times in my life, you know, mostly mid to
[Guest 2]: late 80s.
[Guest 2]: And much later, I realized the guy was making all these four films simultaneously, all great
[Guest 2]: entertaining films.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Parvaresh is all these, you know, one, it's like Nature, Nurture, one brother,
[Guest 2]: other brother, all those kind of stuff happening, Chacha Bhatija is complete sort of, you know,
[Guest 2]: two tricksters and things of that kind.
[Guest 2]: And within themselves, they are fully consistent.
[Guest 2]: So that's one point.
[Guest 2]: The other point is, there is some cultural context to, you know, where the film is being
[Guest 2]: made and who's watching it.
[Guest 2]: And I sometimes think that while there is a lot of universal sort of thing about watching
[Guest 2]: a good film, good cinema everywhere, I mean, a good cinema being good cinema everywhere.
[Guest 2]: So a good example of this is this, you know, this Man, Woman and Child, this Eric Segal's
[Guest 2]: book and then that was made into a film and Shekhar Kapoor made it into Masoom.
[Guest 2]: Had he kept that ending of Man, Woman and Child in India, it would have been, you know,
[Guest 2]: it was not a mega box office hit, but it was a very well received popular film.
[Guest 2]: But I mean, again, this is 40 years back, so no spoilers here.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, in the original book, the Jugal Hansraj character doesn't stay back.
[Guest 2]: He is sent off to the, you know, the boarding school, although the mother, you know, accepts
[Guest 2]: the fact that he's there, but he goes back.
[Guest 2]: Whereas in Masoom, they accept Jugal Hansraj and he stays back as part of the family.
[Guest 2]: I think, you know, that you could not have done that.
[Guest 2]: And maybe in the US, Indian ending would have felt ki yeh kuch zyada kar diya, yaar aisa
[Guest 2]: koi nahi karta hai.
[Guest 2]: Whereas in India, we needed that at the end, that emotional sort of closure.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I would not have accepted that film if they would have sent him back.
[Guest 2]: But you would have thought about it more after it was over.
[Guest 2]: Maybe, but I would have been so disgusted with the idea that they sent him back.
[Guest 2]: Because I mean, you know, at different times in that film, you're so invested in the, in
[Guest 2]: that boy and you know, his story and everything.
[Guest 2]: You didn't want anything bad to happen.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I remember that film, even I think I watched it five, six years back, not the
[Guest 2]: whole film, there was something was happening, I was just watching it, there is a particular
[Guest 2]: scene at the later part, in the later part of the film where this young Jugal actually,
[Guest 2]: you know, cuts his hand with a knife.
[Guest 2]: And he winces in pain and immediately runs, but he knows that he's not having, you know,
[Guest 2]: Shabana's sympathy in any case.
[Guest 2]: And Shabana looks at him, he wants to tell her, but then he knows that he will get no
[Guest 2]: sympathy.
[Guest 2]: So he just puts his hand behind and doesn't tell that he's actually cut his hand, right?
[Guest 2]: It really broke my heart even after so many years while watching that.
[Guest 2]: Uske baad agar usko phir bhej doge, I would have never accepted the film.
[Guest 2]: So I think there are certain choices, which some of the directors will have to, you know,
[Guest 2]: offer based on just what they think is right for themselves, because they are, they are
[Guest 2]: part of a particular milieu, they have grown up in a particular cultural context, and they
[Guest 2]: know their audience.
[Guest 2]: And in some of them, I think we will be different.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, there is some merit in saying that Indian films will be of a certain kind.
[Guest 2]: I mean, some of us, maybe you Amit, might not otherwise have that Indian sensibility
[Guest 2]: in general, because of the, you know, some of your, you know, past, etc.
[Guest 2]: Par logon ko chahiye yaar wo.
[Guest 1]: Well, I think there's also within India, there are just so many cultures and subcultures
[Guest 1]: anyway, you know, I mean, it's, it also depends on the type of film we're talking about.
[Guest 1]: Masoom is actually somewhat difficult to classify film in some ways, but yeah, broadly speaking,
[Guest 1]: it is from a tradition of the dramatic, the emotion soaked film, even though it's got
[Guest 1]: Naseer and Shabana in it, and it was made in that period.
[Guest 1]: But around the same time, the stuff that Shyam Vennigal was making, or Govind Elani was making,
[Guest 1]: was, of course, representative of a different Indian aesthetic or sensibility.
[Guest 1]: And of course, that's without even getting into the many non-Hindi films from around
[Guest 1]: the country.
[Guest 1]: So of course, that's, and today, of course, as you know, there's just so many different
[Guest 1]: types of Indian films or web series or whatever from the 200 crore blockbusters that we think
[Guest 1]: of as sort of catering to the lowest common denominator or whatever, to the Hindi film,
[Guest 1]: to the South Indian films, whatever, it's just so much.
[Guest 1]: So I'm not sure there really is such a thing as an Indian film in that sense anymore.
[Guest 2]: I mean, see, like, for instance, some of our early, whatever you call it, this parallel
[Guest 2]: cinema movement guys, right?
[Guest 2]: Money Call, Kumar Sahani kind of characters, greatly influenced by, especially by Bresson.
[Guest 2]: I've also seen Pickpocket, I've seen Ghadhe Ka Kahani.
[Amit Varma]: Ohazad Balthazar was a damn good film.
[Amit Varma]: I'm very offended.
[Guest 1]: But anyway.
[Guest 1]: And baby donkeys are pretty much the cutest animals there are.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry to have hurt both of you.
[Amit Varma]: I have no experience with baby donkeys, but okay, okay, okay.
[Guest 2]: But then, Money Call comes back and makes, you know, Uski Roti or Ashaad.
[Amit Varma]: Can I quickly disturb you, sorry, to tell you this great story by a former guest on
[Amit Varma]: my show, Naren Shannoy.
[Amit Varma]: So Naren Shannoy has a story that around the time Money Call ki Uski Roti came out, they
[Amit Varma]: had got a TV in the house, or antenna upar tha, but kabhi kabhi there would be a storm
[Amit Varma]: and then people would have to go and they would have to mess around with the antenna
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: To Money Call ki Uski Roti TV pe aaye, I assume it was one of these Tosca things, film aaye
[Amit Varma]: abhi toh dekhna hai.
[Amit Varma]: And so they sat down, they're watching the film and suddenly the screen freezes.
[Amit Varma]: A few seconds pass, the screen is frozen.
[Amit Varma]: So immediately, boy is dispatched upstairs, uncle is leaning out of the window, the boy
[Amit Varma]: is moving the antenna here and there and shouting, theek hua ki nahi, and uncle is saying nahi
[Amit Varma]: thora left try karo, thora right try karo.
[Amit Varma]: After half an hour they discover antenna ka fault nahi tha, TV ka fault nahi tha, it was
[Amit Varma]: a film.
[Amit Varma]: So ki Money Call ne waise hi banayi.
[Amit Varma]: And all I remember of Uski Roti is that the sound was out of sync at one point and I asked
[Amit Varma]: my father what's going on because I must have been watching it with him back then.
[Unknown]: And he was like, no, no, this is a film, you're supposed to appreciate it.
[Guest 1]: So anyway, I'm sorry.
[Guest 1]: You shouldn't have called the antenna guy, you should have called call, better call call.
[Guest 1]: No, but very quickly, sorry, we are just going on interrupting you Subrath, but that reminds
[Guest 1]: me of watching Goddard's Perele Phu at Plaza Cinema in Delhi back in the 90s.
[Guest 1]: And very poor projection, generally the International Film Festival of India was going on.
[Guest 1]: But because this is a Goddard film, and we were all primed for, we had seen Goddard films.
[Guest 1]: At one point, the screen sort of just goes completely out of whack, you know, this is
[Guest 1]: sort of it becomes like a split screen with part of it going down and the bottom half
[Guest 1]: going to the top half, etc.
[Guest 1]: And we sat there for two minutes, sort of around 80% sure it was deliberate.
[Guest 1]: It was part of the film, you know, just sitting with this sort of this hallowed sort of expression
[Guest 1]: on our faces.
[Guest 1]: It's the reverse Narendra Nooyi story.
[Guest 1]: And then of course, it got corrected.
[Guest 1]: And then it became a very sort of very standard.
[Amit Varma]: Goddard, there was himself watching that and thinking, hmm, that's what I should have done.
[Unknown]: This would have been better.
[Guest 2]: This would have been better.
[Guest 2]: Sorry.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, I mean, the point is, oh, you watch Kumar Shani's Maya Darpan or Uski Roti, Aashad
[Guest 2]: ka Ek Din or whatever.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I was it's difficult to have that in the Indian context.
[Guest 2]: I think there was something happening then in France, maybe that kind of stuff was even
[Guest 2]: popular.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you could watch it, but and you knew maybe there is something happening here.
[Guest 2]: But you know, so while whatever Shyam Benegal was doing and even what Mrinal Sen was doing,
[Guest 2]: they were doing it at the same time.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the early 70s, you know, Benegal just was starting off and Mrinal Sen had possibly
[Guest 2]: the Calcutta Trilogy at that time.
[Guest 2]: There were good films, I mean, you didn't have to do what Bresson was doing in India
[Guest 2]: with this.
[Guest 2]: You could still make good, good films.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I never understood that phase, for instance, you know, I can watch an interview
[Guest 2]: of Mrinal Sen or whatever Calcutta 71, I mean, but, you know, watching Uski Roti again is
[Guest 2]: very tough.
[Guest 2]: I mean, not very tough, I'll never watch it again, but so I think there is some something
[Guest 2]: is there.
[Guest 2]: So there is some aspect of storytelling, etc, that appeals to us, I have a feeling.
[Guest 1]: No, no, I have to also say, you know, much as I like to, it's like a confession time
[Guest 1]: in a way, much as I like to, and I also take pride in the fact that I love many different
[Guest 1]: types of films, you know, across a very wide spectrum, there are certain filmmakers that
[Guest 1]: I find very difficult, even today, I mean, I find Tarkovsky difficult.
[Guest 1]: And I wish I didn't, because I really sort of feel like there's a part of me that, you
[Guest 1]: know, with a couple of his films, there's a part of me that does manage to click into
[Guest 1]: the admire the film without quite liking it mode.
[Guest 1]: But that's not a mode I like to be in, because I feel like it's a bit pretentious then and
[Guest 1]: when it comes back to what you said that, you know, you need to sort of to some degree
[Guest 1]: trust your initial, you know, experience of something, and you let it wash over, you know,
[Guest 1]: so, you know, what would I do if I were asked to sit and write a piece about Ivan's childhood
[Guest 1]: or something?
[Guest 1]: How would I write it?
[Guest 1]: I mean, honestly, if I sort of, you know, in some very detached cerebral way, I appreciated
[Guest 1]: the film appreciated that here is a serious artist doing, you know, realizing his vision,
[Guest 1]: but at an emotional level, it really didn't work for me, I was sort of, you know, befuddled
[Guest 1]: by it a little bored by it.
[Guest 1]: How do I write about it?
[Guest 1]: It is a question that that that even today, you know, after more than 20 years of being
[Guest 1]: a professional writer, I don't really know the answer to.
[Guest 1]: So these things are, you know, these are, you know, you're, you can spend a lifetime
[Guest 1]: watching films, thinking about them, engaging with them, but there are always questions
[Guest 1]: that will be unanswered about the watching experience and, and the sort of viewer that
[Guest 1]: you are, and how to deal with a particular sort of film.
[Guest 2]: I think on, on Tarkovsky, I mean, the only film that I mean, I've gone through the same
[Guest 2]: problem.
[Guest 2]: Let's say legend has reached to you, you have to appreciate this, so you have not organically
[Guest 2]: discovered it.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So I think the only thing that the only film where I could sort of get in fully was Solaris.
[Unknown]: Likewise.
[Guest 2]: Because there was a, you know, story to it.
[Guest 2]: And I think a large part of that credit is to that Stanislavsky, I think that that was
[Guest 2]: the writer who wrote the original science fiction thing.
[Guest 2]: So you could figure that thing out, right?
[Guest 2]: After that, you know, Andrew Rublev or Mirror or something, I mean,
[Unknown]: every dialogue is like, if I could say in three words, why not 30, Zeenat Aman's father,
[Guest 2]: by the way, scriptwriter.
[Guest 2]: Wonderful.
[Guest 2]: Sorry, who?
[Guest 2]: Zeenat Aman's father, Aman.
[Guest 2]: One of the scriptwriters.
[Guest 2]: I thought he was saying Stanislavsky's Lem was the father of Zeenat Aman.
[Guest 2]: That would have been quite a connection.
[Guest 2]: I was saying Mughal-e-Azam, where three words would do 30 would be used.
[Amit Varma]: So Subrat, let's with a nod to linearity, if that's how you pronounce it, let's get
[Amit Varma]: back to your sort of story, where eventually, you know, you were one of the driving forces
[Amit Varma]: behind Passion for Cinema at one point in time, you got in with the filmmaking crowd
[Amit Varma]: of that time, and you wanted to make movies yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest 2]: Tell us a little bit about that.
[Guest 2]: Just to set the record straight, driving force would be a huge exaggeration of what I was
[Guest 2]: doing there.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there were, I mean, just to go back to some of the origin story of that.
[Guest 2]: And for those who came in late, Passion for Cinema was a blogging site, where a lot of
[Guest 2]: people came in and wrote about cinema, with somewhat of a laissez-faire sort of attitude
[Guest 2]: to quality of writing.
[Guest 2]: So, initially, we were like, okay, now we'll be a bit, you know, the original plan, of
[Unknown]: course, for any of this is Cahiers du Cinma, we will make it.
[Unknown]: Then from there, that dream came true.
[Guest 2]: But I mean, the initial thing was, you know, there was a guy who was writing on cinema
[Guest 2]: sitting in the US, went by the sort of a name Oz.
[Guest 2]: And then a few other people started sort of, you know, commenting on his blog.
[Guest 2]: And then, you know, things came together.
[Guest 2]: And then, you know, the idea was, we'll do something called Passion for Cinema.
[Guest 2]: And I think, you know, both of you, I used to follow both of your blogs at that time.
[Guest 2]: It was a moment for blogging in India, right, with everyone doing something interesting
[Guest 2]: in that, I think the two of you, there was Sepia Mutiny, and I used to follow all of
[Guest 2]: them.
[Guest 2]: So, we, seven, eight of us initially started writing.
[Guest 2]: And everyone had a particular niche.
[Guest 2]: My kind of niche was sort of humorous take on sort of social issues through the lens
[Guest 2]: of some old Hindi film or song or something and then do random connections in between
[Guest 2]: Pyaasa and some other, you know, film.
[Guest 2]: And then I used to have this sort of a, you know, character called Professor, you know,
[Guest 2]: who would answer questions of people.
[Guest 2]: And so, somebody would ask a question on what is noir and the professor, I mean, it would
[Guest 2]: all be sort of laced with some kind of humor and, you know, that kind of stuff.
[Guest 2]: But you know, seven, eight of us would write.
[Guest 2]: And then what happened was, just because that there was that kind of a platform that platform
[Guest 2]: was gaining salience, some people started coming in and writing and one of the big names
[Guest 2]: and not big then, but clearly someone who had a point of view at that point in time
[Guest 2]: was Anurag Kashyap, who came in and started writing, so he had his own corner.
[Guest 2]: And you know, he came and wrote firstly about the making of Black Friday and just the fact
[Guest 2]: that it wasn't released for a long period of time.
[Guest 2]: And he wrote it really well, I mean, just you could feel the angst of a person who has
[Guest 2]: made something good, but was not getting a release and if you sort of combined it with
[Guest 2]: the fact that Punch was not released as well before that, I think it touched a sort of,
[Guest 2]: you know, chord with a whole lot of people.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, just started getting a large number of people reading it.
[Guest 2]: And then since all of us were also writing stuff, you know, people started engaging with
[Guest 2]: other content, and then just it just took off, I mean, you know, by the sort of sixth
[Guest 2]: or the seventh month, we were getting more than a million page views and stuff.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we would then sort of write in started, at least I am always ready to play to the
[Guest 2]: gallery, start writing stuff so that you could get 100 comments and you know, those became
[Guest 2]: metrics that how to write so that you get 100 comments, I have a complete Manmohan Desai
[Guest 2]: at heart.
[Guest 2]: So, it was great fun and then, you know, because of Anurag, others started coming in, you know,
[Guest 2]: gradually you had, you know, Navdeep, Sudhir Mishra, you know, and then, you know, people
[Guest 2]: would write about some of their iconic work and how that got made.
[Guest 2]: So, it just started becoming a bit of, you know, history, process of filmmaking, and
[Guest 2]: we started running a one minute short festival, people would upload their short films and
[Guest 2]: someone Anurag and others would judge it.
[Guest 2]: Some of the guys who won that then would get an internship with Anurag and some of them
[Guest 2]: became big, you know.
[Guest 2]: And so, that whole thing between 2007 to 2009 was just phenomenally, you know, energizing
[Guest 2]: I mean, and there's just so much of talent coming in.
[Guest 2]: And maybe it was always the case that Bombay was attracting some kind of talent, but you
[Guest 2]: know, just that platform made it somewhat more democratic than what it was in the past.
[Guest 2]: In the past, you would stand outside famous studio, Mehboob studio, RK studio, bribe the
[Guest 2]: watchman and then go in and have a cup of tea and try and, you know, get an audience.
[Guest 2]: But here, you know, somebody could come in, do something, write a good, I mean, there
[Guest 2]: have been cases of that kind, right?
[Guest 2]: People would come, write something good, write two, three times and something and then Anurag
[Guest 2]: would say, let's have a Bombay meetup and then people would land up there and some two
[Guest 2]: other filmmakers or young filmmakers would come and then two of them would click and
[Guest 2]: this guy would start assisting him, which is exactly what happened with Neeraj for instance,
[Guest 2]: it's exactly how Varun possibly wrote a few things and got in and a lot of other cases.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the early, in the early days, Chaitanya Tamhane, all these people were there, Rajkumar,
[Guest 2]: what's Rajkumar's full name now, the guy who made No One Killed Jessica, I forget the name.
[Unknown]: Rajkumar Gupta.
[Unknown]: But you know, my taste, Rajkumar Kohli, Rajkumar Kohli, have you seen the Rajkumar Kohli canon,
[Guest 2]: any movie of that canon?
[Guest 1]: Name the movies, I've seen Nagin for sure.
[Guest 1]: Nagin was with Sridevi, Reena Roy, Reena Roy, Rekha, lots of people.
[Guest 1]: But I think I might have seen it also, it's not Nigahe, which was the one in which Sridevi
[Guest 2]: was a snake?
[Guest 2]: Nagina.
[Amit Varma]: Nagina is a slightly, I mean, Rani Dushman with Sanjeev Kumar as a werewolf, spoiler.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't seen that, Sanjeev Kumar as a werewolf, I mean, quite a chilled out werewolf.
[Guest 2]: Sanjeev Kumar as a werewolf, only preying on young dulhans.
[Guest 2]: Yaar iski method acting kaise karte hoonge log?
[Guest 2]: How do you prepare for this?
[Guest 2]: Watch the, yeh sawaal toh, you don't ask when American werewolf in whatever.
[Guest 1]: Listen, after this conversation, Amit's going to go and cleanse himself by watching Decalogue.
[Unknown]: The whole Kislow sketch, three colours were red, blue, white.
[Unknown]: Ek haft hai mujhe baith ke.
[Amit Varma]: Double knife of Melonique, sab dekh raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: Maza kura ho, maza kura ho, aur ho raha ho.
[Amit Varma]: So haan, so you were saying?
[Guest 2]: So yeah, so then, you know, we used to have meetups and there was, you know, this whole
[Guest 2]: sort of, I mean, there was a certain, you know, what the French call free song in the
[Guest 2]: air.
[Guest 2]: Ho raha tha sab kuch, maza raha tha, people were bouncing off ideas with one another,
[Guest 2]: you know, people are getting breaks and stuff of that kind.
[Guest 2]: So, I mean, my general sort of role in all of this was, like, I've always seen myself
[Guest 2]: as a consumer than creator.
[Guest 2]: But I sort of fancied that I could write a little bit reasonably well.
[Guest 2]: And since others were doing stuff, so sometimes, yeah, the thought did cross my mind ke kuch
[Guest 2]: karte hain aisa.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, you should have a good, strong enough pull.
[Guest 2]: All my interests that I had in films and everything, I just never was pulled strongly enough.
[Guest 2]: By pull, you mean your internal desire?
[Guest 2]: Internal desire.
[Guest 2]: Because, I mean, whatever work I was doing, I could see a lot of people were not, they
[Guest 2]: used to be deeply unsatisfied with just the regular work that they were doing, which,
[Guest 2]: for whatever reason, never happened to me.
[Guest 2]: So, I could never go down that path eventually.
[Guest 2]: But I got to know a lot of these people, peripherally, sometimes directly.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of them in the course of the next three, four years after that, and then, you
[Guest 2]: know, the passion for cinema had to shut down because like most good things, creative people
[Guest 2]: together, then they started fighting.
[Guest 2]: The whole idea was at the core of it, should we be controlling for quality on what comes
[Guest 2]: on the site or not?
[Guest 2]: And which way should we go down?
[Guest 2]: Should we start raising funds and funding our own independent cinema?
[Guest 2]: All of these things happened, including pitch books were made.
[Guest 2]: Some of my background in that was useful to raise funds to say that we'll make our kinds
[Guest 2]: of film and all of that.
[Guest 2]: Could have happened, something could have happened if we went down that path, because
[Guest 2]: they were just reasonably talented people in the mix.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, it was always, I mean, whatever, ego battles and stuff.
[Guest 2]: So, after three years or so, it shut down, four years almost.
[Guest 2]: But those four years were very good.
[Guest 2]: I mean, quite exhilarating.
[Guest 2]: And I think in some ways, in whatever small way, I think it contributed a fair amount
[Guest 2]: to Indian films.
[Guest 2]: At least I can name 15 or 20 people today who have come out of passion for cinema who
[Guest 2]: actually are directly involved in the Hindi cinema, whatever in Bollywood, and doing fairly
[Guest 2]: good work.
[Guest 2]: So, and a lot of film critics also, some of their early work was there.
[Guest 2]: I remember, I mean, I do not want to name them, but a lot of them started writing first
[Guest 2]: on the PFC site.
[Guest 2]: So, that was my brush with the Versova crowd.
[Guest 2]: I kept in touch, I still am in touch, although it's becoming more and more distant.
[Guest 2]: Many of them have done so well that it's difficult to sometimes find time.
[Guest 2]: I've also kind of moved and, you know, in my career, so it's tough.
[Guest 2]: Looking back, I think, you know, there was a, it would have shut down on its own.
[Guest 2]: Blogging was a certain point in time kind of a thing, phenomena, and it would have,
[Guest 2]: Twitter was already there, and it was starting to disrupt this.
[Guest 2]: But maybe if we had transitioned onto something as a platform, with funding and stuff of that
[Guest 2]: kind, we could have had, we could have done something.
[Guest 2]: We could have been contenders.
[Guest 2]: But hua nahi.
[Guest 2]: But for me, that was a lot of my, you know, bachpan ka all the sapna and everything of
[Guest 2]: being on a film set, you know, meeting people who actually do make films.
[Guest 2]: I think wo sab satisfy ho gaya.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I could never imagine that this was possible.
[Guest 2]: Although I must tell you that in the first year or so when I came to Bombay, the keeda
[Guest 2]: was so strong that I did all the stuff.
[Guest 2]: I went and met Babbar Subhash B. Subhash, who directed movies like Disco Dancer Tarzan.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I just love the guy.
[Guest 2]: I'm just, so I went and met him.
[Guest 2]: I have like all kinds of stories of meeting him.
[Guest 2]: I somehow found my way into catching up with Bappi Lahiri.
[Guest 2]: I mean, this Dance Dance, Kasam Pehda Karne Wale, these are like, you know, people later,
[Guest 2]: I mean, it sort of became like you should like them because it's of one kind.
[Guest 2]: I genuinely watched these films with full enthusiasm.
[Guest 1]: I have to say Dance Dance was actually one of the films of my childhood.
[Guest 1]: I don't think I've ever said this in public before or written about it.
[Unknown]: It's always the first time, go ahead.
[Guest 1]: No, no, just I think it's just lots of memories attached to it during a summer spent in Bombay
[Guest 1]: when I was pretty unwell for a large part of this vacation.
[Guest 1]: But listening to songs and dialogues from it on radio, which kept playing for some reason in Bombay
[Guest 1]: before I actually came back to Delhi and watched the film and enjoyed it,
[Guest 1]: I felt like I already knew it.
[Guest 2]: So, I mean, I think I've mentioned this to a lot of my friends, etc.
[Guest 2]: So Dance Dance has my sort of a single line, which is my life's philosophy.
[Guest 2]: So, there is this early in the film, I mean, this is Dance Dance is a story of Mithun,
[Guest 2]: you know, as a child, I mean, their parents are sort of killed off by Amrish Puri.
[Guest 2]: And because they go to Amrish Puri's mansion, and they start and they're like dancers and singers
[Guest 2]: and Amrish Puri takes fancy to the woman and then he knocks off both of them after that.
[Guest 2]: And so Mithun and his sister who turns out to be Smita Patil later, they are left on their own in Bombay.
[Guest 2]: And so then they have to sort of make a living.
[Guest 2]: So they start dancing in Chowpatty, Mithun starts dancing.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, people put money and stuff.
[Guest 2]: And then there is a Halwawala who comes in, and then the Halwawala gives them Halwa.
[Guest 2]: I've never seen on a Bombay Chowpatty Halwawala ever.
[Guest 2]: But you know, it's tribute to Babar Subhash that he could think of Halwawala.
[Guest 2]: Not just that he thought of Halwawala, he even decided that he will put a Halwawala song in it.
[Guest 2]: And that became the iconic song called Aagaya Aagaya Halwawala Aagaya.
[Guest 2]: And somewhere in that film, just at that early stage, this Smita Patil older sister character tells Mithun
[Guest 2]: that agar tujhe halwa khana hai, toh tujhe naachna hoga.
[Guest 2]: Dance, dance.
[Unknown]: And that's when the thing comes on screen, dance, dance.
[Guest 2]: And I was like, yeah, this makes sense ki agar tujhe halwa khana hai.
[Guest 1]: It's as good a life philosophy as anything.
[Unknown]: Brilliant.
[Guest 1]: Dance, dance is also that rare heartwarming film of the 80s where Shakti Kapoor finds redemption at the end.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, because Shakti Kapoor and Mithun are part of a dancing troupe.
[Guest 2]: And like the first 20-30 minutes after they grow up, I think Babar Subhash,
[Guest 2]: I have a feeling he had just watched Saturday Night Fever and Grease.
[Guest 2]: So these guys were doing that stuff.
[Guest 2]: So Shakti Kapoor was doing that.
[Guest 2]: So because Shakti Kapoor was, you know, part of the dancing troupe.
[Guest 2]: So it was good fun.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you did that.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, so that was that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, including Babar Subhash in Tarzan.
[Guest 2]: So Tarzan is this Kimi Katkar debut.
[Guest 2]: And initially, there is this group who's going into some African jungle
[Guest 2]: because they know that there is a Tarzan there and they want to catch him
[Guest 2]: because they want to put him in a circus and make money off him.
[Unknown]: Simpler times.
[Guest 2]: So how do they know that there is a Tarzan?
[Guest 2]: In the initial part of the movie, it's established that they're watching some, you know, Doordarshan news.
[Guest 2]: And the newsreader says, yeh woh jungle hai.
[Guest 2]: Aur yaha pe aaye din Tarzan paya jaata hai.
[Unknown]: Ek Tarzan paya jaata hai.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, so I had to meet him.
[Guest 2]: But anyway, going back.
[Guest 2]: What was meeting him like?
[Guest 2]: It was great.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what did you want?
[Amit Varma]: What did you say?
[Guest 2]: I just said, you know, I've grown up watching your film and everything.
[Guest 2]: And he was very, they don't get irony.
[Guest 2]: And not that I was coming at it that way.
[Guest 2]: And they've, I mean, many of these guys I've met, they immediately start talking about, you know,
[Guest 2]: how they did it and what were the, you know, challenges.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, he was going in Goa one day.
[Guest 2]: He was stopped at the signal and he saw a girl and a boy.
[Guest 2]: And then he thought, what if these people, Michael Jackson had become very famous.
[Guest 2]: Isme se agar ek Michael Jackson ban jaaye to.
[Guest 2]: So, one of the things I learned there is that for them, it is as much a passion, craft, everything,
[Guest 2]: as it is for some, you know, otter or whatever you might call him.
[Guest 2]: Because he's seeing it that way.
[Guest 2]: In fact, you realize he's not seeing it as you think very commercially as well.
[Guest 2]: I mean, that was my sort of, you know, moment of understanding that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, yeah, I mean, it should be commercially successful.
[Guest 2]: But I think he's as commercially inclined as somebody else who's possibly making a film because it's great art.
[Guest 2]: At a certain level, I sense that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's not a cynical exercise.
[Guest 2]: It's not a cynical exercise.
[Guest 2]: Deeply invested.
[Guest 2]: Thinking ki aisa karo to kaisa hoga.
[Guest 2]: Isko karo to usko hoga.
[Guest 2]: So, I mean, at one level, you can laugh at disco dancer that, you know, that guy Pinchu Kapoor and Karan Razdan find some guy in London.
[Guest 2]: Yeh duniya ka sabse achha disco dancer killer hai.
[Unknown]: Isne chaar disco dancer ko maara hai.
[Amit Varma]: That's like, you know.
[Guest 1]: I can imagine that LinkedIn profile.
[Guest 1]: Well, around the same time that this film was being made, Jaane Bhi Toh Yaaro had the disco killer played by the young Anupam Kher.
[Guest 1]: Which, of course, never sort of made it to the finished film.
[Guest 1]: But that, again, was a fairly similar concept.
[Guest 1]: This is a short-sighted character who goes around with a Sony Walkman in his ears and shoots people while listening to music and doing the disco.
[Amit Varma]: Main yeh soch raha hoon ki if your future profession is going to be disco dancer killer, what are you interning at?
[Amit Varma]: Are you, like, hand-breaker of break-dancer?
[Unknown]: Anyway, sorry, to continue with your narrative.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so...
[Guest 2]: No, anyway, so the broader point, Amit, is...
[Guest 2]: I mean, before that, before coming into the passion for cinema kind of circle and meeting these people,
[Guest 2]: I mean, I had paid my homage to a lot of these things by being at those places where these famous films were shot.
[Guest 2]: You know, I don't know, maybe you folks who've lived in Bombay long or who were in Bombay before,
[Guest 2]: you know, just going down that Marine Drive the first time,
[Guest 2]: and if you're a film fan or you've watched films,
[Guest 2]: you know, it's a different feeling.
[Guest 2]: I mean, pehli baar, you've seen this so many times.
[Guest 2]: You've seen this in Leke Pehla Pehla Pyar, Bharke Aankhon Mein Kawar.
[Guest 2]: From then, Devanand walking down Marine Drive, to Amitabh, Rote Huye Aate Hai Saab,
[Guest 2]: to Rajni Gandha, Kai Baar Yung Hi Dekha Hai,
[Guest 2]: Jo Man Ki Seema Rekha Hai, to, you know, Rim Jim Gire Sawan.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are, it's like, the first time I came into Bombay,
[Guest 2]: and the first time I went to Nariman Point, in fact, my office was at Express Towers.
[Guest 2]: And I, you know, before reaching office itself, I was like, you know, I was overwhelmed.
[Guest 2]: Because there are just so many scenes that, you know, you have seen the same drive.
[Guest 2]: But I did all of that, and I went to different places, RK Studios and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: But passion for cinema became a medium where I could actually directly interact with people,
[Guest 2]: see the shoots and everything.
[Guest 2]: Somehow, it also took away something.
[Guest 2]: Once you demystify the thing, man, it becomes somewhat less...
[Guest 2]: The making of the sausage.
[Guest 2]: It somewhat becomes less magical.
[Guest 2]: In fact, there is a thing that from 2012, 13, 14,
[Guest 2]: the intensity with which I would follow cinema, etc. started, you know, ebbing.
[Guest 2]: Maybe there was also because of other things in life, you know, having a family and things of that kind.
[Guest 2]: But, and now it is definitely, it's not at the level that it was 10, 12 years back.
[Guest 2]: And sometimes I regret that I've lost something by not being so deeply passionate about something.
[Amit Varma]: To what extent do you think you're deciding, no, I don't want to be a filmmaker.
[Amit Varma]: One, you've pointed out the pull was not so strong.
[Amit Varma]: But also the push would not have been strong because you were doing well in your career.
[Amit Varma]: And beyond the point, it obviously didn't make sense to give this up for that.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of a factor is that trade-off?
[Amit Varma]: And I imagine anybody who wants to be a filmmaker, there's both of these matter.
[Amit Varma]: One, the pull can be so intensely strong that you are like, I can't do anything else in life.
[Amit Varma]: But if the pull is not strong, the push could still be strong in the sense that your job could suck so bad.
[Amit Varma]: Or you're so fed up in your family business.
[Amit Varma]: Or you're so fucking useless at other things, you don't have a job.
[Amit Varma]: That you're saying, okay, I'll do this.
[Amit Varma]: And the opportunity cost is not that high as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So how much of a factor do you think that was and do you sometimes like go back to that,
[Amit Varma]: where there's a fork in the road and think of the road not taken?
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are, see, firstly, I know people who had they not come into films,
[Guest 2]: would have almost, you know, I mean, possibly died.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, in the sense that it's they would have just not been able to do anything else.
[Guest 2]: That was never the case with me.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, that itself solves for the problem.
[Guest 2]: The second is, of course, you know, how badly you feel trapped in whatever you're doing.
[Guest 2]: And some of that how badly you feel trapped in what you're doing is a matter of pull also.
[Guest 2]: But sometimes, like you said, the opportunity cost is nothing.
[Guest 2]: You know, you feel so terrible in what you're doing.
[Guest 2]: And maybe what you're doing, you're also bad at it, that you go down that path.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I've never thought of that that often.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are some other like, sometimes I do feel writing something,
[Guest 2]: I mean, maybe even just a script or, you know, writing a book or something.
[Guest 2]: I feel that if one had given some time to that, I might have, I don't know whether I might have been good at it,
[Guest 2]: but I think I would have done something well, you know, something good as part of doing that, you know, getting into that.
[Guest 2]: Overall filmmaking, I don't know.
[Guest 2]: I think that phase has gone.
[Guest 2]: I don't regret or I don't have any what if kind of thinking in my mind.
[Guest 2]: At that point in time, for a period of time, it was there.
[Guest 2]: But now it's gone, it's gone.
[Guest 2]: Will it come back?
[Guest 2]: I think the writing thing is definitely going to come back.
[Guest 2]: Filmmaking, I don't know.
[Guest 2]: It's like I said, the intensity with which I feel for cinema now is much lower than what it was in the past.
[Guest 2]: So that's one of the things that I think is permanent almost now.
[Guest 2]: I don't think I will recover it.
[Amit Varma]: That said, there are many, I mean, history is littered with examples of late bloomers who did great work pretty late in their lives.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps the diminishing of intensity may also come with a calmness of vision and a terror that could also lead to something.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you another question.
[Amit Varma]: And this, in a sense, is for both of you.
[Amit Varma]: And partly because, you know, many of the people will, you know, that I'll ask about personally.
[Amit Varma]: But also to really to both of you, because you have also seen Indian cinema evolve.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned how passion for cinema at the start wanted to be like a Kayyadu cinema, right?
[Amit Varma]: So there's a great Andrew Cyrus quote about Andre Bazin, who was one of the founders of Kayyadu cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And Cyrus wrote, quote, Bazin was the antithesis of Russian film theorist and director Sergei Eisenstein,
[Amit Varma]: who posited that film didn't become film until it was sliced up and served montage style.
[Amit Varma]: Eisenstein advocated for the collision of images and conflict of classes in films.
[Amit Varma]: Bazin believed that film should be smooth and needn't be so socially weighty.
[Amit Varma]: He felt that film should have a realism to them.
[Amit Varma]: He focused on mise-en-scene as opposed to montage, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of the progress that this indicates is, I think, also a way in which young filmmakers would mature.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense that when you first want to make a film, you're very conscious of it being slick.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe you're influenced by, you know, maybe Nolan, as JSA Today's kids are, or before that, Tarantino and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And style matters a lot for its own sake.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you want big ideas, you want weighty films.
[Amit Varma]: But I would imagine that as time goes by and you mature, you don't necessarily want to do that anymore.
[Amit Varma]: You just want to let stories tell themselves and, you know, you kind of move to a different sort of place.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, with the filmmakers you've known, for example, and you've known guys who've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: made a journey and evolved a lot in their own way.
[Amit Varma]: You know, for example, I love Chaitanya Tamane's work.
[Amit Varma]: I think he's just mind-blowingly good.
[Amit Varma]: Court must be one of the best first films ever made.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, I think there was a phase where a lot of young directors would possibly have been in the thrall of stylists
[Amit Varma]: and trying to, you know, make films in a particular kind of way.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, maybe they would have grown, maybe they did grow, maybe the ecosystem changed overall.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your kind of sense of the journey that, you know, these filmmakers have made and that films themselves have made in India?
[Guest 2]: I don't know about, I mean, of the recent sort of filmmakers.
[Guest 2]: I don't know if I can point to a particular filmmaker and their evolution.
[Guest 2]: Forget if whether I know them or remotely know them.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it is difficult.
[Guest 2]: I can't immediately think of it.
[Guest 2]: In fact, somewhat some people have gone the other way.
[Guest 2]: I mean, like Dibakar.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, that's exactly what I was thinking of.
[Guest 2]: For instance, was very good in his first couple of films.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Khosla Ka Ghosla was actually a very smooth, full sort of a film.
[Guest 2]: And Oi Lucky Lucky Oi, which I think was a fantastic film and, you know, much deeper than many things that came out.
[Guest 1]: But, you know, if I can just just interact for a bit, I think even between Khosla Ka Ghosla and Oi Lucky Lucky Oi, there's a vast difference in terms of the stylistic binary that Amit was talking about just now.
[Guest 1]: Oi Lucky Lucky Oi is a much more fast paced film that draws attention to the nuts and bolts of its construction.
[Guest 1]: Khosla Ka Ghosla is more in the tradition of the Rishi Keshmukherji, Basu Chatterjee, middle cinema, where everything is at the service of storytelling.
[Guest 1]: And to my mind, I mean, I love Oi Lucky Lucky Oi, I like it better than Khosla Ka Ghosla.
[Guest 1]: And I think even something like LST, where Dibakar sort of then allowed himself to sort of just get experimental and sort of bordering on avant-garde, you know, by the standards of the cinema.
[Guest 1]: Like you said, it represents a movement in the opposite direction from what Amit suggested just now.
[Guest 1]: But again, I don't think it's, you know, it was to his detriment as a filmmaker, it just meant that he was doing, he was trying different things out.
[Guest 1]: And I also wanted to just point out, I mean, I'll just let you get back to this since you were talking.
[Guest 1]: But I just want to point out that that Bazin quote was also very sort of explicitly directed at these ideas that the Russians, Eisenstein in particular, had about montage and the idea that film acquires meaning only when different unrelated images are placed next to each other.
[Guest 1]: Like the lions in the Odessa, the step sequence and stuff like that.
[Guest 1]: Whereas what Bazin was doing, and this is still very early, relatively early in the 1940s or 50s, but Bazin was pointing to filmmakers like Renoir, etc.
[Guest 1]: Who didn't need to use montage in that way, who very often had gliding cameras, long takes, but still it wasn't theatrical.
[Guest 1]: It was still very much cinema because the camera was still choosing what to show you, etc.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of editing and a lot of cuts was not required, but it was still a different form of cinema.
[Guest 1]: And I think if you're sort of moving that binary to the current day, 70 years later, I think it can sort of lead us down to some very sweeping generalized statements about directors and their trajectories.
[Guest 1]: I think the Barker, I'm glad that example came up because he really is, in addition to being a filmmaker of a certain quality, even in his lesser work or whatever we might agree his lesser work might be, he's just done all sorts of things.
[Guest 1]: And he hasn't, his career in terms of what he's done stylistically, his stylistic or formal choices, has not followed any clearly observable trajectory in either direction.
[Guest 1]: He just seems to sort of just pick his subjects, his mode of storytelling, and then go with it.
[Guest 1]: So Khosla Ka Ghuzla can be followed by LSD, which can then be followed by, again, a relatively straightforward narrative film like Shanghai, and then something like Biyomkesh Bakshi.
[Guest 1]: Again, irrespective of what we think the quality of the films is, just talking about the way they are filmed, the style of it.
[Guest 1]: So again, I think it's just, you know, if a filmmaker makes an honest decision based on the subject that he has, and how he feels he given his own sensibility, how he feels that subject is best tackled,
[Guest 1]: then I don't think one should sort of, you know, really, really, really get judgmental in either direction about, you know, either the Eisenstein principle or the Bazin principle.
[Amit Varma]: I guess what I was, I agree with you. I mean, like, for example, I think both Kurosawa and Ozu are just great, great filmmakers, and they are exactly the opposite approaches, right?
[Unknown]: Kurosawa choreographs everything.
[Unknown]: I'm going to come to Ozu.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I mean, I love Ozu a bit more, but I can see why they are great, great filmmakers.
[Amit Varma]: But what I kind of meant was that when you initially become an artist of any sort, and I see this with young writers also, that, you know, you'll get carried away by what you can do with words so much that the style takes over the substance instead of being a slave to it.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in Kurosawa's case, of course, everything serves a film and what he's doing, and there is great style, but everything serves sort of the substance.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get back to Subrata, I have a question for you, Jai, which is, is it pronounced Bazin?
[Amit Varma]: I'm not sure.
[Amit Varma]: Because Andr Bazin, so I thought I was being damn sophisticated.
[Guest 1]: No, no, I just go to the opposite sort of extreme of the inverse snob thing of pronouncing a word as I see it, if I'm not sure.
[Amit Varma]: Like a Punjabi, ascetic.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry, let's hand the mic.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I think I was actually going to come to the Ozu, Kurosawa, you know, in some sense, you know, the difference.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, you watch an Ozu film, actually, there is, it is, it is like that, it's like a smooth film with, you know, lots of emotions.
[Guest 2]: And if you watch a Tokyo story, sometimes you're not like, what is so celebrated in this?
[Guest 2]: Because if there is, it's not showy at all.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you watch a Rashomon, you know that there is something happening here, right?
[Guest 2]: But just as a viewer myself, over the years, I have started liking that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I, I like the, I don't think I've watched it, but every, I mean, I'm sure this year, this time also finally the result may go I got Tokyo story 1, 2, 3, or something that I didn't be there.
[Guest 2]: Tell the listeners what you're talking about results.
[Guest 2]: Okay, sorry.
[Guest 2]: I think there is this every 10 years, I think the last was 2012.
[Guest 2]: And then so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: They've gone back and this is 2022.
[Guest 2]: There's a UK magazine called Sight and Sound, where they poll film critics around the world as well as directors around the world for their top 10 films.
[Guest 2]: And then based on the votes, they come out with the top 100.
[Amit Varma]: And our man Jai is one of the critics.
[Guest 1]: I'm very proud to announce that I have an Osu on the list, but it is not Tokyo story and it's, it's, it's the second film in the so-called Noriko trilogy early summer, which I have a very special fondness for partly because I really love the film.
[Guest 1]: And partly one reason why Tokyo story is just sort of an aside really, I tend not to, you know, rate Tokyo story as highly as most people do is simply because I'm a huge fan of a 1937 Hollywood film called Make Way for Tomorrow, which, which is a film that influenced Osu when he was making Tokyo story.
[Guest 1]: And it's arguably the first major film that deals with the subject of, of elderly parents being neglected by their children and sort of looking forward to a life of, you know, of neglect and just, just being alone by themselves.
[Guest 1]: So it's a lovely, very atypical film directed by Leo Macare from 1937 and Tokyo story owes something to it.
[Guest 1]: So, so because of my for special fondness for that film, I just sort of feel like, you know, there are other Osus that I prefer personally, but, but yeah, back to what you were saying.
[Guest 2]: I think, I mean, maybe we should talk about early summer.
[Guest 2]: I seem to, I think I watched that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Tokyo story just for the listeners often gets in that ranking, often ends up at number two or number three.
[Amit Varma]: Citizen Kane topped it for decades.
[Guest 2]: For many decades. And then I think last time 2012 was one of the first time when Vertigo and that also reflects on who are the people who are voting because I think
[Guest 1]: I wouldn't be surprised if there's a, there's a quite summary change in the list this time, in terms of the position of all these, you know, the films we mentioned Tokyo story, Citizen Kane, Vertigo, I think that there could be a pretty major change this time.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So far, I mean, and Tokyo story, you know, it's a very, I think the Indian audience can relate to what the story is.
[Guest 2]: It's about an old couple coming into Tokyo to live with their kids, you know, and the older kid and his wife, they have no time for this couple.
[Guest 2]: And they're also somewhat, you know, disoriented in Tokyo. Tokyo was just about sort of becoming a large metropolis then.
[Guest 2]: And then they have a, they also had a second son who passed away in the war.
[Guest 2]: And the widow of that son is someone who spends time with this old couple.
[Guest 2]: And it's very nice. It's really nicely done.
[Guest 2]: And this is part of the trilogy that Ozu had.
[Guest 2]: So, and, you know, this, it's a very, it's a very different sort of treatment than some of the more celebrated, you know, Kurosawa kind of films.
[Guest 2]: But Jaya, maybe a little bit on what draws you to Early Summer?
[Guest 1]: Early Summer is just, I just, it's hard to say, I think, you know, beyond the point, how do you articulate why you feel a very strong emotional connection with a film.
[Guest 1]: But it's a film with the same great actress, Setsuko Hara, who plays Noriko.
[Guest 1]: The character's name Noriko across three films for Ozu.
[Guest 1]: Not the same Noriko.
[Guest 2]: It's not the same Noriko.
[Guest 2]: It's a flower of Japan.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So, and she passed away just a few years ago, I think just three, four years back.
[Guest 1]: But she's, she plays this young woman, maybe a 27, 28 year old woman, which means that she's past, she's well past the age where a young woman of that society needs to get married.
[Guest 1]: And the whole family, you know, the joint family, everybody's very concerned about this daughter of the family, who's also a working woman, the need for her to get married.
[Guest 1]: And she's quite stoical about everything.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, there's this all the speculation about who the right groom for her will be meeting people and so on.
[Guest 1]: And I don't know, I think there's just something very spare.
[Guest 1]: This is true of all of Ozu's work, I suppose.
[Guest 1]: But it's very spare, very to the point about the way this, you know, that that typical tatami mat angle of Ozu, you know, with the camera barely moving or moving maybe two or three times in the whole film.
[Guest 1]: It's just used to just observe the society with the shifting equations within a family with, and maybe because I'm sort of I'm Indian myself, there's things about it that I could relate to.
[Guest 1]: The whole joint family set up, some of the themes that emerge in Hindi cinema, when it comes to these subjects, arranged marriages, things like that.
[Guest 1]: Yet it was sufficiently from a different sort of culture with a different aesthetic, very subdued, I think.
[Guest 2]: She makes an unconventional choice, right?
[Guest 1]: Yes, but it's again, so the film really doesn't, it's not like it's underlined in any way, it's just there.
[Guest 2]: It just sort of happens and it's all sort of organically there.
[Guest 2]: And everybody accepts there is no drama, you know.
[Guest 1]: Little things, well, you know, Ozu is full of those little moments, right? Tokyo Story, the famous moment where the Noriko character is just asked, someone rhetorically says to her, isn't life disappointing?
[Guest 1]: And Setsuko Hara with the most dazzling and beautiful and warm smile in film history just says yes, you know, and it's just a moment like that.
[Guest 1]: There's so much of that and yeah, you know, when you have things like that, that, you know, at film appreciation, you know, you're appreciating a film on those terms.
[Guest 1]: Then, of course, you're looking at a film that has completely different strengths from a film made by a Godard or a Felony or a Kurosawa.
[Guest 1]: Films that are much more cinematic in that specific way that we describe cinema as something very visual, dynamic, kind of kinetic.
[Guest 1]: But then, you know, you have Ozu, you have Bresson, you have people like that just, again, through the sheer honesty of their work and being able to convey that honesty in filmmaking using a very spare aesthetic.
[Guest 1]: They are just as great filmmakers in a different way.
[Guest 2]: Sometimes, some of the Basu Chatterjee films, like for instance, Sara Aakash, the first Basu Chatterjee film was very
[Guest 1]: It's very striking. It's a very striking film, right from that opening sequence, whether through the streets of Agra, with that music, the classical music, little glimpses of the Taj Mahal in between.
[Guest 1]: And then, of course, subsequently, he went on to make much more, like Rishikesh Mukherjee in the 70s and 80s, films that had the visual look, the aesthetic of the TV serial, basically.
[Guest 1]: Nothing very exciting going on at a visual level.
[Guest 1]: So, it's interesting that So, yeah, that's another example of someone who, closer to what Amit was saying, someone who started off in 1969 with Sara Aakash, making this very dynamic looking film.
[Guest 1]: And of course, it's a film that also has Mani Kaul in a small role in it.
[Guest 1]: Yes, he's the brother.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest 1]: 1969 is quite a year for the, you know, the proto new wave.
[Unknown]: Bhuvan Shom also.
[Guest 1]: Bhuvan Shom, Sara Aakash, Uski Roti, all coming out in the same, all shot by the great KK Mahajan, the cameraman of the new wave.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe if that film had proved to be something that persuaded Mani Kaul to stay on in filmmaking, then you could have said the film didn't make money, but it made money.
[Amit Varma]: So, in modern times, do you think that there is a greater scope for young filmmakers to develop in unusual directions, which may not depend on what their peers or the people they're working with are doing?
[Amit Varma]: For example, we're talking about Ozu, and earlier I mentioned Tamhane's Kote, and you know, Kote has a lot of Ozu like characteristics of the still camera and things are just unfolding and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I can't imagine how a film like that could have come to, could have been made in the 1990s in India, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And today, I think something like that might even be more possible in the sense that the means of production have become so incredibly cheap, that really anybody can make a film.
[Amit Varma]: Like one film that I saw in Mami, which I loved is the Japanese film One Cut of the Dead, great horror film, which by Shinichiro Ueda, which was made for the equivalent of 20 lakh rupees.
[Amit Varma]: And it ended up grossing more than 200 crores, you know, and obviously an outlier in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: But in the sense that a today the means of production have become much cheaper, it's much easier for someone who wants to do audio visual storytelling to say,
[Amit Varma]: I'll do something on YouTube, I'll do a vlog first, I'll experiment, I'll do this, I'll do that.
[Amit Varma]: So the big bottleneck as far as I see in the film industry, in my naive understanding is really distribution more than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the filmmaking part and, and also because, you know, you learn something by doing it, and it's so much easier to do something.
[Amit Varma]: So one, there is that. And two, there is also the matter that now influences from everywhere are pouring in, you no longer need to be say in a particular theater in Calcutta at a particular point in time to be exposed to good cinema.
[Amit Varma]: Good cinema is all around you. In fact, just leaving the term cinema aside, good audio visual content is all around you can get inspired by anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think that there, you know, that one should therefore be hopeful about a greater diversity of influences and therefore styles and growth in young Indian filmmakers today?
[Guest 1]: I think we already have that, right? Don't we already have? I mean, I, I just feel like, you know, when people engage in a certain form of golden ages,
[Guest 1]: and you know, I'm a big fan of old cinema from various decades and very defensive about it in some ways also.
[Guest 1]: But, but I always sort of find myself disagreeing when, when, you know, there's a certain sort of nostalgic, you know, talk on social media about how, you know,
[Guest 1]: the films that used to be made earlier are not made now. And I feel like we are living in an age where pretty much any sort of film can get made and is getting made to some degree or the other.
[Guest 1]: Now, of course, like you also pointed out, it's a distribution or the right sort of publicity is a different matter.
[Guest 1]: There'll be, there'll obviously be with the amount of material there is and the amount of content there is now, there will always be films that, that many people won't even notice or won't realize are available out there.
[Guest 1]: I'm regularly sort of, you know, I'll, I'll see someone mention something on Facebook about a film that's on Amazon Prime, that's on Prime or Netflix or whatever,
[Guest 1]: which I didn't even realize was there or existing, despite the fact that this is partly my job to know about these things.
[Guest 1]: But, but I think already we are in the situation where all sorts of films are being made, all sorts of, there's probably a greater variety of approaches, you know,
[Guest 1]: currently than there has been at any time in the past, you know, in terms of the different, different aesthetics, different approaches to form and content, everything.
[Guest 1]: So, so, so I think that's already happening. And of course, in terms of the means available, you know, you have internationally, I suppose in India also,
[Guest 1]: but internationally you have, you have a filmmaker of the stature of Steven Soderbergh shooting a film on a phone and a good film, you know,
[Guest 1]: a film with an A-list star like Claire Foy, I'm talking about this film called Unsane, which was shot on an iPhone,
[Guest 1]: directed by Steven Soderbergh, starring Claire Foy and solid feature film that just sort of works as a, as a very immersive experience.
[Guest 1]: You know, you have someone like that. So then of course, younger filmmakers will also have all sorts of tools available to them.
[Guest 2]: I think, you know, the production is democratized. The challenge really is both the distribution and discovery then.
[Guest 2]: You know, the fact that, you know, Jai can't find a film, while it's his professional sort of, you know, pursuit.
[Unknown]: You had one job.
[Guest 2]: So, so it's, it's impossible for others to find it, right? I mean, so, and that really is, then you don't know whether you're actually getting,
[Guest 2]: and, you know, then who are you, I mean, who's promoting you in the sense somebody, you know, I don't know whether those kinds of things will happen ever again,
[Guest 2]: you know, that some, John Dahl or whoever finds him and starts doing that and that guy makes rounders or something, you know, I mean, and it's like that.
[Guest 2]: I don't know whether that's possible or is going to happen. But I agree with you that, I mean, there are all kinds of talent.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I, you know, this, there's this movie called Promising Young Woman. I don't know if you've seen that.
[Guest 2]: This lady Fennell, Emerald Fennell, who also was the showrunner for Killing Eve.
[Guest 2]: And who also played, Helena Bonham Carter, who played Camilla in The Crown.
[Guest 1]: So, I mean, just sometimes you're like, boss, she's such a talent. No, it's a very, very fine film. Promising Young Woman is one of my favorite films of the last few years.
[Guest 2]: So, there's this Carrie Mulligan film, and she's very good. So, when you see and then you realize that she's made the film,
[Guest 2]: then she's the showrunner for Killing Eve, and then she herself acted in that, and you're like, boss, one has to keep an eye out.
[Guest 2]: I mean, these guys will do things, right? So, I think that, I mean, the talent sort of, you know, coming through of all kinds, making different kinds of films, etc.
[Guest 2]: I think that will continue. And it'll only become easier, but you're right. The discovery is what I sometimes worry about.
[Guest 2]: You know, who's going to find, who's going to champion, will enough people get to know or by the time you champion, it's an avalanche, you know, you're buried under another 20.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, that's, and that's, again, a function of the sheer volume of things that's available out there.
[Guest 1]: So, of course, one does feel sorry for a lot of potentially, you know, upcoming directors, scriptwriters, etc.
[Guest 1]: who might have very good stuff, you know, with them, but might just get buried under everything that's already available and not quite get the opportunities.
[Guest 1]: That's, you know, it is a problem of plenty in that sense, when it comes to the distribution thing or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, just thinking aloud, maybe the focus and the importance will shift from producers and studios to filters.
[Amit Varma]: Because we discover content typically through, you know, we have different kinds of filters, maybe it is a film blogger, maybe it is a particular YouTube channel, which is talking about films or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there's a lot there to happen. We were talking about Andrew Sarris earlier and Andrew Sarris, of course, you know, came to fame or notoriety as it then was when he did this review of Hitchcock's Psycho,
[Amit Varma]: which I know you're also a fan of Hitchcock, where he praised it to the skies and he said it's such a great film and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And at that time, Hitchcock wasn't particularly taken seriously. And Sarris was attacked for it and so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: Pretty much anyone who wrote anything good about Psycho in 1960 was attacked.
[Guest 1]: I mean, Robin Wood, who's one of my favorite writers, semi-academic writer, who wrote this great book called Hitchcock's Films Revisited, he submitted a review of Psycho when he wasn't a professional film critic to Sight and Sound, run by Penelope Houston at the time.
[Guest 1]: And a very detailed, wonderful piece, which of course made it to his book eventually, but she rejected it politely saying, you know, you fail to grasp that Hitchcock did not intend this film to be taken seriously.
[Guest 1]: So, yeah, so that of course, but yeah, sorry, go on.
[Amit Varma]: So, my question here is that that's a way of looking at what, you know, Subrata also said earlier about history being fickle, about you can regard something as highly at one point and not think of it 100 years later and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: And today, of course, Hitchcock is, you know, right there at the top of everybody's mind, including the Sight and Sound poll last time with Vertigo and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: If you had to out of, you know, your personal favorites, urge that someone be taken more seriously, that I mean, obviously not comparing anyone to Hitchcock, but in the sense that this person is not taken seriously enough, yaar isko dekho, you know, you know, what would kind of come to your mind, either in terms of filmmakers or films or really anything at all?
[Guest 1]: What a question to ask. Are we here for another five hours or something?
[Amit Varma]: I'm not, I'm not kicking you out.
[Guest 2]: I mean, my sort of, again, system one answer, and I guess, you know, a few days back on another WhatsApp group, we sort of touched on this. My system one answer would be Peter Weir.
[Guest 1]: Sorry?
[Guest 1]: Peter Weir.
[Guest 1]: Oh, yeah, right.
[Guest 2]: That would be my immediate answer.
[Amit Varma]: He was taken very seriously.
[Guest 1]: There we are entering very subjective territory, you know, once we start talking about underappreciated films or filmmakers, then everything, you know, I was going to, this sounds funny now, but Buster Keaton, okay, who, you know, most knowledgeable film viewers today, or, you know, people who know anything about film history actually regard him, quite rightly, in my view, as one of the most important figures in film history.
[Guest 1]: There's a revisionist thinking now that places him above Chaplin, which I don't quite agree with, but I see the point because Keaton was known for his deadpan expressions and his lack of emotion, expressiveness, his athleticism, whereas Chaplin was more about the pathos and so on.
[Guest 1]: And when we're living in a time where that sort of drama, melodrama is out of fashion, as mentioned, so it's easy to see why Keaton is so highly regarded, but he was an absolute great who was neglected for several decades.
[Guest 1]: And yet, you know, if you were to ask me about some of my favorite underappreciated films, I might actually mention Keaton for no better reason than because so many people, and I'm not just talking about young people.
[Guest 1]: The snappers who don't even know who Chaplin is because he was before Nolan. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, there's so many people have no idea about Keaton and his importance. And, you know, so I would probably I might even name one of his films as, you know, an underappreciated film that needs to be rediscovered.
[Guest 1]: So that's a subjective thing. So if you, you know, if you were to ask something like that, Peter Weir is actually a pretty good name, I think, because he's really not.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, I think he I mean, of course, he was big, but you know, he's sort of I mean, even, you know, decently aware, people today about films will struggle, I mean, on who he is, or he was.
[Guest 2]: But they'll kind of have a sense of what his films are like Witness, Dead Birds Society, Truman Show. Yeah, but again, I think he's been I mean, I would still sort of put him under the underappreciated category right now.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if you take, I think that day, we were sort of just we just alluded to the, you know, the hanging rock film. It's like, I mean, the way it's done, plus, you know, just the meta point around these white men, not white people not understanding
[Guest 2]: that the land that they are in has this other mysterious stuff that happens, etc. He did it really well. I mean, that that film really holds, I would say, I think I watched it again, some 7-8 years back.
[Guest 2]: It really holds and that other one, Mel Gibson, Gallipoli, about the war. Gibson is just amazing. Nobody considers Gibson amazing these days. Politically wrong statement.
[Guest 1]: Well, you've pretty much put an end to my plan of naming John Ford as one of the underappreciated filmmakers. But the reason I say that, of course, he's, you know, in his time, and again, for knowledgeable people, one of the most iconic directors of all time.
[Guest 1]: Well, also, but that's the least sort of interesting thing about him. But today, you know, he's so out of fashion, because there's this, in my view, very unfair, you know, I had a long, long chat once with our mutual friend Girish about this.
[Guest 1]: Ford just is out of favour in so many liberal, quote, unquote, liberal circles, because many people, including people who should know better people like Quentin Tarantino, have just got him pigeonholed as someone who just made these racist films about cowboys killing Indians, and Indians reserving it.
[Guest 1]: And you go back and actually look at his filmography, look at it closely, you see much more nuance than that, in addition to, you know, him just being a very important filmmaker who influenced people like Orson Welles and Kurosawa, etc.
[Guest 1]: But, you know, so on one level, it would be laughable to refer to John Ford as an underappreciated filmmaker, because he's one of the most well known directors of all time in most film circles, knowledgeable film circles. But in this context that I'm discussing, you could probably sort of, you know, name even someone like him.
[Guest 1]: But to give perhaps a more satisfactory answer to your question, looking at someone contemporary, there's one filmmaker, as you know, you know, one of the most revitalizing things for me personally has been getting into contemporary Malayalam cinema and to a slightly lesser degree Tamil cinema in the last few years.
[Guest 1]: You know, in your 40s, to suddenly discover a completely new filmic culture and to sort of start engaging with it the same way that I was engaging with Kurosawa, etc. as an adolescent, that's very empowering, it's exciting, you know, it sort of makes you feel alive again as a film buff.
[Guest 1]: But even within Malayalam cinema, which tends to be somewhat, you know, rooted, grounded compared to the mainstream Hindi cinema, there's a filmmaker named Don Palathara, who I have a lot of regard for. He's even within the world of Malayalam cinema, he's someone who's a bit of an outlier.
[Guest 1]: You know, he works outside even the, what might be called the mainstream of Malayalam cinema. He's made five films so far, I've watched all but one of them. And he just has this very distinct sensibility where, you know, you just sort of watch his films and you get a sense of honesty, that, you know, here's someone who's just being true to what he sort of wants to do without any sort of frails or without being influenced by the outside world.
[Guest 1]: Most of his films are in black and white, by the way, very, very resting black and white. One film of his that I really, really liked, even though it's the sort of film that some people might find pretentious or problematic in terms of, you know, if you look at it in a very superficial sense, you know, from the gender lens, it's a film called Everything is Cinema, which both in terms of the title and in terms of the treatment of the film could easily be a 1960s Goddard film.
[Guest 1]: It's just, you know, a story about a documentary filmmaker whose face we never see and who was voiced by Palathara himself. So, it's got this meta quality. He's in Calcutta to shoot a documentary along the lines of Louis Mal's Calcutta film and he's there with his wife and then the lockdown happens in 2020.
[Guest 1]: So, they are basically stuck. They can't go out and do their research, etc., any shooting, etc. They are stuck in one room together, in one little flat together. And then, you know, the whole film basically just takes the form of this guy whose face we never see. We only hear his voiceover, pointing his camera repeatedly at his wife, you know, he's getting fed up of her.
[Guest 1]: They are sort of cloistered together and, you know, saying these extremely, you know, chauvinistic things about her, criticizing her, you know, just saying things like that. And it's such an interesting film in terms of what it, you know, this perspective it provides of the nastiest aspects of the male gaze or whatever it is.
[Guest 1]: Plus, it's got this experimental side to it because of the very nature of the filmmaking, the handheld camera, the meta-ness of it. It's very interesting. It was along with all of Palathara's films, it was on Mubi India. I don't know if it still is. It might be. But that's one example of someone who, even within the world of Malayalam cinema, I feel he's someone who's just so interesting and should get a wider audience at some point.
[Guest 2]: I was just curious. We just, we were getting into that conversation before we started recording. Who else do you have on that list?
[Guest 1]: Well, from filmmakers of an earlier time, like I said just now with Keaton and John Ford, I mean, my interpretation of someone who's underappreciated might be very different from what Amit had in mind.
[Guest 2]: I meant the sight and sound list.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not sure that I should speak about that at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: When does the sight and sound list come out? This episode could come after that. So then it would be fine.
[Guest 1]: Should be sometime in the next two or three months.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. I mean, I don't know when this will come out.
[Guest 1]: But I'm not sure exactly. So I'll just sort of be prudent.
[Guest 2]: But you did mention about, in general, about your Brian De Palma.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, well, there is a De Palma film there. I don't know if you've seen this, this very early De Palma film called, well, no, not very early, but it's called Hi Mom.
[Unknown]: 1970 film.
[Guest 1]: It's very, very interesting. It's sort of, it just sort of points, among other things that I see it as pointing the way forward to Travis Bickle, six years later.
[Guest 1]: But it's, it's just, it's, it's got this, is this film that just has this film within a film called Be Black Baby.
[Guest 1]: The theatre stuff, right?
[Guest 1]: Which to my mind is one of the most interesting, you know, films of that period.
[Guest 1]: That's, that's actually providing a commentary on, on bleeding heart liberals who sort of who just want to empathize, empathize, empathize with the underprivileged.
[Guest 1]: But do it from a safe distance and sort of, and from a position of some comfort, which is all of us, basically.
[Amit Varma]: But I find the, like, there'll be a tactical element to making your list and sending it to them, right?
[Amit Varma]: The two films that at least so far you've named from the list, which you've put in, the Ozu film and the Depalma film.
[Guest 1]: Very different, very different types of films.
[Amit Varma]: Are different types of films and not films anybody else would name.
[Amit Varma]: So they're not going to be in the top hundred.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas a tactical way of doing it would be to think that what are the films I really like that are also likely to be named by other people.
[Amit Varma]: So let me at least make sure they get a little higher up.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, no, no. So that wasn't a consideration for me at all.
[Amit Varma]: You just said I'll name my best 10.
[Guest 1]: I'll name the 10 films that come to my mind at this moment, as opposed to 10 minutes later.
[Guest 1]: Because then the list would be different 10 minutes later.
[Amit Varma]: But is there any standard choice in that list?
[Guest 1]: There are three that, now again, am I going to start naming all the films?
[Amit Varma]: I think Subrat and I were sinisterly thinking that, okay, let's remove them.
[Guest 1]: Of the 10, there are three films that would be broadly, also when I looked at the last 2012 list, I think all three of these films figure in the top 50 or 60.
[Guest 1]: So then with them, there is the possibility that my vote might actually make a difference to the pecking order.
[Guest 1]: But with none of the others, the others are all films that are really not going to make it to the top 100 or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: There is one guy who will go from 51 to 49 and he won't even know that Jai Arjun Singh has done it.
[Guest 1]: You will find out, all the lists will be on the website.
[Guest 2]: Do all the lists come?
[Guest 1]: All the lists come.
[Unknown]: So your list will also be there.
[Unknown]: And you're not telling us.
[Unknown]: Not now, when it publishes.
[Amit Varma]: And if it's published before the episode, I'll just put it in the show notes as well.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So you guys have been kind enough to spend a lot of time.
[Amit Varma]: Is there anything else you'd like before?
[Amit Varma]: I'll end, of course, by asking you to recommend films, books, music, whatever for the listeners, especially ones that you feel are underappreciated.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, is there anything else you'd like to talk about with, you know, that I might have missed?
[Guest 1]: There's plenty, I'm sure both of us would like to talk about, but again, you know, it's just a matter of call us again tomorrow or whatever.
[Guest 1]: You already, you're busy tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: I'm booked.
[Amit Varma]: I'm recording 11 episodes in 11 days.
[Amit Varma]: You guys are number four, which is why I still have some energy.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so let's go with recommendations, which I did warn you about before.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I've already given one.
[Amit Varma]: Which is?
[Amit Varma]: The Pallathara.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: Can you just name all his films?
[Amit Varma]: Because I really want you to pronounce them.
[Guest 1]: These are not difficult films to pronounce.
[Guest 1]: Actually, there's a 1956 Central Travencourt, which is one.
[Guest 1]: Well, there's one that's very difficult to pronounce, which I won't even try.
[Guest 1]: But the English title is Joyful Mystery, which is a very interesting film.
[Guest 1]: Also, it's his only colour film.
[Guest 1]: It's an 84 minute film that's shot in a single take, which is entirely from the front of a car where two people are on their way to drop off a report to sort of find out if the woman is pregnant and the conversation that goes on.
[Guest 1]: So it's just a single take film, the English title of which is Joyful Mystery.
[Guest 1]: And well, there's the one I mentioned, Everything is Cinema, 1956 Central Travencourt, Shavam, The Corpse.
[Guest 1]: There's Vith, which is The Seed, I think.
[Guest 1]: So those are the five.
[Amit Varma]: So you have four more to name, because you're going to name a total of five.
[Unknown]: And one of them was Pallathara, which you named.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the others?
[Amit Varma]: It was a cluster.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, there was a cluster.
[Unknown]: It counts as one.
[Guest 1]: When I say Decalogue, I can't say I've named ten films.
[Guest 1]: Let Subrat go.
[Guest 1]: What are you asking?
[Amit Varma]: Are you asking for underappreciated films?
[Amit Varma]: No, actually, now I'm asking for just what you'd like to recommend that people watch.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously, there's no point naming a mainstream thing that everyone has seen.
[Guest 1]: Let Subrat go while I refresh my memory by looking at my films watched, notes in recent films watched on my phone.
[Amit Varma]: That's what you're pretending you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: You're probably checking your Twitter.
[Guest 2]: So Subrat, go ahead.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I mean, I mean, I don't know whether I mean, there's so many of them.
[Guest 2]: I mean, just to sort of go down the memory lane and, you know, suggesting some films, but I'll just keep throwing films.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So, I mean, we did speak about this screwball comedy sort of, you know, time.
[Guest 2]: So I think the Lady Eve would be one, I think the the noir films of that time, whether it's the Postman Rings twice.
[Amit Varma]: I remember once I think the first time we met in person, you gave a 40 minute lecture to an enraptured group of people on noir and the different kinds of noir and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But we can handle that some other time.
[Guest 1]: Are you a fan of noir?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, well, I have actually hosted a lot of online film discussions about film noir of the 1940s.
[Guest 1]: And in fact, the next discussion will actually be looking at some films that are technically genres like westerns, but which are very much 1940s noirs as well.
[Guest 1]: Treasure of the Sierra Madre and films like that.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, so I could easily make up a list of noir films exclusively.
[Amit Varma]: Next time we meet, we should talk only about noir and I have a title for the episode.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you're talking about the history of noir from beginning to end.
[Guest 1]: Noir's Arc.
[Unknown]: Noir's Arc.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Subrat, back to you.
[Guest 1]: I used that as a title of a blog post once.
[Amit Varma]: Now you're preempting my jokes.
[Amit Varma]: It's like we're becoming a married couple or something here.
[Amit Varma]: Not good.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, so I mean, I mean, of the 40s, yeah, I mean, Postman Rings twice, Key Largo.
[Guest 2]: That's the Florida noir, Sunshine noir.
[Guest 1]: Although they're a little later.
[Guest 1]: There's a film from that period, sorry, which since we're talking like this and we're doing the jugal jugal bandhi.
[Guest 1]: Definitely an underseen film compared to a lot of the major noir films of that time.
[Guest 1]: It's a B movie, generally regarded as a B movie called Gun Crazy.
[Guest 1]: Which is interesting in particular because it's nearly 20 years before Bonnie and Clyde.
[Guest 1]: And it's very much, it's one of the prototypes of the couple on the run film.
[Guest 1]: The couple sort of operating outside the law on the run.
[Guest 1]: And it does some very interesting things with location, for a film made in 1949.
[Guest 1]: It does some very interesting things with location shooting, with long takes.
[Guest 1]: There's one, there's one shot.
[Guest 1]: Coincidentally, I mentioned the Palathara film just now, which is a single take shot from the front of a car.
[Guest 1]: Gun Crazy has a bank heist, which is shot exclusively from the back of the car that the couple are sort of, you know.
[Guest 1]: They park outside the bank and then he goes in and so on.
[Guest 1]: It's a very unusual long take for that period.
[Guest 1]: So that would be one on my list as well.
[Guest 1]: You mentioned Lady Eve.
[Guest 1]: Now if you're talking about Preston Sturges, I'm a huge fan of Sullivan's Travels.
[Guest 1]: Which of course is the film that the Coen brothers referenced in O Brother, Where Art Thou?
[Guest 1]: Because that title appears in Sullivan's Travels for the first time.
[Guest 1]: There's so many others.
[Guest 1]: There are the westerns of, you know, I know there's a very strong Hollywood film bias going on here over a certain period.
[Guest 1]: But the westerns made by Anthony Mann in the early 50s with Jimmy Stewart, films like Winchester 73 and Bend of the River.
[Guest 1]: Which were just such interesting films, you know, psychological westerns as you'd call them.
[Guest 1]: Which where the accent is a little less on action and shootouts and a little more on characters and their interactions.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I'll continue. I mean, you'll get more than five minutes now.
[Unknown]: Please go ahead. The more the better.
[Guest 2]: I mean, just to sort of...
[Guest 2]: I mean, my listeners don't have a life. What are they going to do, man?
[Guest 2]: If I narrate an episode of five hours, they'll be able to watch a movie.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the 40s, even in the Hindi films, I think, some of the early Dilip Kumar, I think is quite good.
[Guest 2]: Shaheed, for instance, I like it.
[Guest 2]: The prints might be poor, so you have to figure out if you're able to get good prints.
[Guest 2]: Andaz of Mehboob Khan is lovely.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's a love triangle.
[Guest 2]: Raj Kapoor, Dilip Kumar, Nargis, great songs, Naushad and Majrooh.
[Guest 2]: And in Andaz, I mean, just to go down this general rabbit hole.
[Guest 2]: I mean, actually in Andaz, Rafi was singing for Raj Kapoor and Mukesh was singing for Dilip Kumar.
[Guest 2]: And that was how it was for some time.
[Guest 2]: You know, Dilip Kumar found Rafi as his voice a little later.
[Guest 2]: Although in Shaheed, Vatan Ke Vaaste Vatan Ke Naujawas Shaheed Ho was a Rafi song.
[Guest 2]: But Talat was singing quite often for Dilip Kumar.
[Guest 2]: In fact, almost the voice of Dilip Kumar in the early 50s.
[Guest 2]: And in Andaz, Jhoom Jhoom Ke Nacho, Aaj Tu Kahe Agar, etc. were all Mukesh songs, which was picturized on Dilip Kumar.
[Guest 2]: And some of those early V Shantaram films also of 1940s are quite good.
[Guest 1]: For the 30s even, Duniya Na Mane.
[Guest 2]: Duniya Na Mane and Aurat, not Aurat, what is that other one?
[Guest 2]: The one that had Sai Pranjpe's mother.
[Guest 2]: But anyway, so these couple of those films, which from Hindi of the 40s, you know, 50s and 60s.
[Guest 2]: There are, you know, there are, I mean, I'm generally a Billy Wilder fan.
[Guest 2]: I love, I mean, the guy just had range.
[Guest 2]: So, I mean, again, I mean, if people, I mean, these are very famous films of those times.
[Guest 2]: But if people have not watched it, I would suggest, I mean, some like it.
[Guest 2]: Hot is just a great film.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely fun.
[Guest 1]: I think during our last conversation, Amit, I actually mentioned Ace in the Hole.
[Guest 2]: Billy Wilder's Ace in the Hole.
[Guest 1]: That's one of the somewhat under the radar films that.
[Guest 2]: I think Ace in the Hole is just a fantastic film.
[Guest 2]: This is a Kirk Douglas movie.
[Guest 2]: Billy Wilder movie.
[Guest 2]: This is almost like this peoply life kind of, you know, copied it.
[Guest 1]: 70 years ago with the whole media circus.
[Guest 2]: So, Kirk Douglas is a sort of, he's been fired from his job in New York or somewhere.
[Guest 2]: And he goes somewhere down to Colorado or somewhere looking for a job.
[Guest 2]: He's just a sort of, you know, investigative journalist or whatever.
[Guest 2]: He's just a guy who's looking for stories to, again, redeem himself.
[Guest 2]: And finds a story of a guy who, while drilling something, has gone into a, you know, gadda inside.
[Guest 2]: Stuck in a cave.
[Guest 2]: And then the story is that this guy wants to prolong the story for as long as possible.
[Guest 2]: With some disastrous consequences eventually.
[Guest 1]: Does that sound familiar?
[Guest 2]: Yeah. And this is, so this is like Wilder simultaneously was doing all kinds of things here.
[Guest 2]: I mean, he's just amazing.
[Guest 2]: And a whole lot of them who came from Austria, Germany.
[Guest 2]: I mean, these are not actually English speaking people.
[Guest 1]: They brought a very particular sensibility from there.
[Guest 1]: You know, Lubitsch came first.
[Guest 1]: Then Wilder assisted him.
[Guest 1]: The whole bunch of them just played a big part in fashioning the Hollywood of that time also.
[Guest 2]: In fact, there's this movie called Sweet Smell of Success.
[Guest 1]: Bert Lancaster film.
[Guest 1]: And Tony Curtis, yeah.
[Guest 2]: Just absolutely, you know, great film.
[Guest 1]: Very hard hitting film, again, about partly about the media and what it can do.
[Guest 2]: There's a cinematographer, there's a Chinese origin cinematographer, right?
[Guest 1]: James Wong Howe.
[Guest 1]: Who's the cinematographer here.
[Guest 1]: It's a beautiful looking film.
[Guest 1]: Close to home, one of the films that I, in fact, I think I may have mentioned it to Subrat before we started,
[Guest 1]: that I watched.
[Guest 1]: And one of the reasons it strikes me is both because I really enjoyed watching it.
[Guest 1]: I think watching it for the first time properly as an adult.
[Guest 1]: Also because there's an excellent print of it available online.
[Guest 1]: Gulzaaz Mere Apne, which is a 1971 film.
[Guest 1]: And of course, we were talking about Haal Chaal Theek Thaak Hai sometime back.
[Guest 1]: That's the name of the song in Mere Apne, which is a very hard hitting commentary on various things,
[Guest 1]: various problems that the country was facing at that time in 1970-71.
[Guest 1]: And as is so often the case, you know, when we are living in the present moment,
[Guest 1]: there's this tendency to sort of, you know, the recency bias or whatever,
[Guest 1]: to think that the problems we are facing today are exclusively of today.
[Guest 1]: And very often it's quite surprising to go back and look at a film made 50 or 60 or 70 years ago
[Guest 1]: and see the same things being talked about.
[Guest 1]: I don't know if, I don't remember now if I have in our previous talk,
[Guest 1]: if I mentioned this wonderful 1953 film called, 1952 film called Mr. Sampath, which was a
[Unknown]: Motilal.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, it's made, it's based very loosely on an R.K. Narayan novel.
[Guest 1]: But the film is very, and it's a remake of the Tamil film Miss Malini.
[Guest 1]: But it's, here's a film made less than five years into independence.
[Guest 1]: You know, a time that we sort of, you know, the persistent narrative is that it's a time of Nehruvian idealism, etc.
[Guest 1]: It's like biting into a sour lemon.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, it's got a very sarcastic song called Ache Din Aa Raha Hain Hai Hurra,
[Guest 1]: where the song basically, song lyrics are about how Ache Din are never actually going to come.
[Guest 1]: But, you know, it's this ironical thing going on in 1952.
[Guest 1]: Padmini and Motilal.
[Guest 1]: The agent kind of thing.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, it's a very, you know, I always refer to that film, you know,
[Guest 1]: when I often get people telling me with great authority,
[Guest 1]: Jaane Bhi Toh Yaaro is the first black comedy satire in Indian cinema.
[Guest 1]: And I say, Hindi cinema mein bhi nahi hai.
[Unknown]: You know, please.
[Amit Varma]: Hold my drink.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so this is also, this is another, coming back to what we discussed earlier,
[Guest 1]: people just, you know, when you don't have a sense of deeper history, which is fine.
[Guest 1]: Most of us, it's not like we can know everything or be fully formed or something.
[Guest 1]: But then, it would be nice not to make big statements,
[Guest 1]: saying that this film is the first example when you don't know what has gone before.
[Guest 1]: So, Mr. Sampath is one example.
[Guest 1]: Mere Apne, of course, is not a hard-hitting satire in the same way,
[Guest 1]: but it's got that song and it's got a few scenes about unemployed youth in the India of that time.
[Guest 1]: Very disgruntled by the situation that they're in.
[Guest 1]: But finding some sucker through an old woman played by Meena Kumar,
[Guest 1]: you become like a nani figure to all of them.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely print online.
[Amit Varma]: Some sucker.
[Amit Varma]: For a moment, I heard it as the other sucker.
[Guest 2]: So, I was thinking ki.
[Guest 2]: But 50s again, I mean, so, for instance, sticking to some of the Hindi films of the 50s,
[Guest 2]: I would still, for those who haven't seen Bimal Roy films,
[Guest 2]: and, you know, Jai, when I attended one of his film appreciation classes,
[Guest 2]: where you took us through the Diya song of Parag.
[Guest 1]: Oh, Parag, yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest 1]: Lovely photography, yeah.
[Guest 2]: So, Parag is a very good film.
[Guest 2]: I mean, this is, I mean, the plot is like, you know, there is a village,
[Guest 2]: and there is like the whole village ecosystem, panchayat,
[Guest 2]: and there is a particular event that triggers chaos there, you know,
[Guest 2]: which is, and it's a nicely done thing.
[Guest 2]: Everybody then starts suspecting that people are jockeying for things.
[Guest 2]: Great songs, of course, O Sajna Barkha Bahar Hai,
[Guest 2]: Saril in just peak form.
[Guest 2]: But that's a good movie.
[Guest 2]: There's a movie called Uche Log.
[Guest 2]: Again, I recommend that this is a movie made by a very old sort of director of the 30s
[Guest 2]: who was still working then called Fani Majumdar.
[Guest 2]: And Uche Log is a copy of a Tamil, you know, play called Major Chandrakant,
[Guest 2]: K. Balachandra had written that.
[Guest 2]: Ashok Kumar and Feroz Khan, Feroz Khan in one of his early films.
[Guest 2]: It's like a good story.
[Guest 2]: Has one great Rafi song, Jaag Dil Hai Deewana.
[Guest 2]: Do you sing?
[Guest 2]: No, no, I don't sing.
[Guest 2]: Please don't tell.
[Guest 2]: Otherwise, I would have asked you to sing a little bit of it.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's just, it's Chitragupt, the father of Anand Meland.
[Guest 2]: There, his music and Majrooh's lyrics.
[Guest 2]: But the film is great.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if you just, you know, if you can't watch it, just read the plot somewhere,
[Guest 2]: I mean, on IMDb or something.
[Guest 2]: It's a great plot.
[Guest 2]: I mean, to have made that film in the 60s.
[Guest 2]: Fani Majumdar, by the way, I mean, just to go back into time,
[Guest 2]: in the 30s, Calcutta was a big hub of Indian with new theaters, right?
[Guest 2]: So there was this guy called B. N. Sarkar.
[Guest 2]: B. N. Sarkar was a sort of, you know,
[Guest 2]: aristocratic feudal sort of a guy with a lot of land and everything.
[Guest 2]: He had gone to London, studied in wherever, Cambridge, etc.
[Guest 2]: And he was very fascinated by films.
[Guest 2]: So he came back to India and he set up this new theater.
[Guest 2]: And then he just decided that all good talent should come here.
[Guest 2]: So, and the fact that there was generally this whole Bengali renaissance, etc.
[Guest 2]: So there were people who were writing, listening to music and all that.
[Guest 2]: So some of the earliest playback stuff, music and all of that was done in Calcutta with new theaters.
[Guest 2]: So there was this three guys, Raychand Bural, R. C. Bural, Timir Baran.
[Guest 2]: So these couple of people came in and they started playing.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they started actually giving playback music.
[Guest 2]: And till then, the classical Indian music has no concept of harmony.
[Guest 2]: There is no guitar in the sense, right?
[Guest 2]: So it's like monotonic, a single instrument or two instruments going.
[Guest 2]: So in that sense, R. C. Bural was actually almost the pioneer of bringing the notion of music
[Guest 2]: in that sense of having harmony and different instruments and getting organs and all of that into this.
[Unknown]: Why did I go here? Oh, from Fani Majumdar, okay.
[Guest 2]: So now, and then he got some of the best directors.
[Guest 2]: One of the big directors then who he sort of nurtured was P. C. Barua, who made the first Devdas.
[Guest 2]: And the first Devdas, again, if you look at the title credits there, the editor was or whatever,
[Guest 2]: it was Rishikesh or Vimal Roy. And then Vimal Roy's editor was Rishikesh.
[Guest 2]: And then he got K. L. Saigal.
[Guest 2]: And it's very difficult.
[Guest 2]: I mean, now we sort of caricature that particular singing style and all.
[Guest 2]: But I mean, there was no such phenomena that people have seen after, you know,
[Guest 2]: in the sense of how popular he was and just the quality of his voice and all of that.
[Guest 2]: And so Devdas, first Devdas had K. L. Saigal.
[Guest 2]: It was great songs.
[Guest 2]: And then the new theaters made some great K. L. Saigal films.
[Guest 2]: One of them was called President, which had that Ek Bangla Bane Nihara, hugely popular song.
[Guest 2]: And that was, so that film was made by this guy called Nitin Bose,
[Guest 2]: who later goes to Bombay and makes Ganga Jamuna and all that.
[Unknown]: Although critics believe that Dhirub Kumar only made the film.
[Guest 2]: And then there was a movie called Street Singer, which had the greatest pairing possible of them.
[Guest 2]: Right. Which is K. L. Saigal and Kanan Devi.
[Guest 2]: And then K. L. Saigal has that song called Babul Mora Nahi Aur Chhuto Na,
[Guest 2]: which is actually the song written by Wajid Ali Shah.
[Guest 2]: And it's a fantastic thing, right.
[Guest 2]: So Wajid Ali Shah has been driven out of Awadh.
[Guest 2]: And Wajid Ali Shah, if you remember, he was not necessarily interested in all this statecraft, warfare, etc.
[Guest 2]: Loses Awadh.
[Guest 2]: And he's famously that guy whose portraits always have him exposing his left nipple.
[Guest 2]: So then they exile him to Calcutta.
[Guest 2]: And then while going, he writes this Babul Mora Nahi Aur Chhuto Na, meaning I'm leaving this.
[Guest 2]: And of course, going back to the biryani story, Wajid Ali Shah is the reason why Calcutta Biryani has the potatoes.
[Guest 2]: Why?
[Guest 2]: Because they came in here.
[Guest 2]: He was living off a British pension.
[Guest 2]: So they wanted to add substance as the story goes.
[Guest 2]: Nobody knows this for a fact.
[Guest 2]: So they wanted to add a little bit of weight to the biryani.
[Guest 2]: They didn't have enough meat.
[Guest 2]: So they started adding potatoes.
[Guest 2]: So Wajid Ali Shah came to Calcutta, started living in a particular place, brought in two iconic Calcutta dishes, the Calcutta Biryani.
[Guest 2]: And there is something, if you go to Calcutta, there is something called the Rezala.
[Guest 2]: Rezala is a particular kind of chicken or mutton dish.
[Guest 2]: Both were brought in by Wajid Ali Shah.
[Guest 2]: Why are we at Wajid Ali Shah?
[Amit Varma]: This is the best kind of conversation.
[Guest 1]: While we were on Wajid Ali Shah, one of the really interesting discoveries I made fairly recently was that when Satyajit Ray was making Shatranj Ke Khiladi, his first choice for Wajid Ali Shah was Asrani.
[Guest 1]: Asrani?
[Guest 1]: He wanted Asrani.
[Unknown]: Which might have been quite interesting actually.
[Guest 1]: Maybe not the perfect physical fit.
[Guest 1]: But that might have been interesting.
[Guest 2]: But Amjad was a good fit.
[Guest 2]: He was a very good fit.
[Guest 1]: He worked very well eventually.
[Guest 1]: But this came from the letters that Ray and Suresh Jindal exchanged, which are collected in this new book on Shatranj Ke Khiladi, where Suresh Jindal reproduces one of the early letters, where Ray is saying, I'd like to sort of, you know, just meet Asrani to talk about this.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe Asrani refused to expose his left nipple.
[Amit Varma]: Possibly.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, sorry, carry on.
[Guest 2]: Asrani being an FTII graduate said, I'll do the rest.
[Unknown]: I'll show you the right nipple.
[Guest 2]: So anyway, so street singer had that Babul Mora Nahiya Chutona, first time with Wajid Ali Shah, iconic song.
[Guest 2]: And then Kanan Devi was there.
[Guest 2]: Kanan Devi also used to sing some of the great songs.
[Guest 2]: But the Kanan Devi is known for that one song after she also moved to Bombay, because eventually things started shutting down in Kolkata.
[Guest 2]: Largely because the partition meant that almost 60% of the audience went away.
[Guest 2]: So the commercially films became difficult.
[Guest 2]: But Kanan Devi, there is this very famous song called Toofaan Mer, Yeh Jeevan Hai Toofaan Mer.
[Guest 2]: Huge hit of the early 40s.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, but if anybody is interested ever to, if you have the time and the inclination, dive a bit deeper into KL Sehgal, you will not be disappointed if you are keeping an open mind about it.
[Amit Varma]: What I'm going to ask both of you to do is I'm going to ask both of you to make a Spotify playlist or maybe multiple Spotify playlists.
[Amit Varma]: So music that you love from that era or whatever, categorize it as you want, which is why I said maybe multiple ones.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll link them from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So if you can do that for me, that'll be quite...
[Guest 2]: I have some Spotify playlist of the episodes that we did of Haal Chaal, done by people who liked that episode so much that every little snippet of song or something that we would do, they would note it down and then they would have the...
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm now outsourcing that to you, though I know you're very busy.
[Unknown]: So anyway, we were in 60s, right?
[Unknown]: Correct, long way to go.
[Guest 2]: We'll carry on.
[Guest 2]: 70s, I think I would say that there are a bunch of films of, I mean, the whole parallel cinema movement.
[Guest 2]: Like for instance, I mean, late 60s, 70s, I would definitely again recommend Farah Akash.
[Guest 2]: I think people have watched Rajinikanth enough.
[Guest 2]: So that's a good movie.
[Guest 2]: See, during that time, even Sara Akash, these are all stories of this Nai Kahani movement that was happening in India, in Hindi literature.
[Guest 2]: So Sara Akash also is a story from the Nai Kahani movement.
[Guest 2]: Rajinikanth, which was written by, the original story was by a lady called Munnu Bhandari, who passed away just during the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: Who was married to Rajendra Yadav, who wrote Sara Akash.
[Guest 2]: I was going to bring that connection.
[Guest 2]: And so her story was called Yeh Sach Hai.
[Guest 2]: It starts off beautifully.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, the way she starts Yeh Sach Hai.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, those two Bhuvan Shom as well.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Suhasini Mule and Pal Dutt and sort of interesting kind of a film, which people can watch.
[Guest 2]: In Hollywood, again, I think we've never come back to the Brian D. Palmer conversation.
[Guest 2]: But I mean, I was saying that earlier, people have watched Coppola and Godfather and everything.
[Guest 2]: But you know, there is a Coppola movie called The Conversations.
[Guest 2]: That's a thing that I would suggest.
[Guest 2]: There's an actor called John Kazal.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if people know enough about him.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so John Kazal is a guy who only acted in five films.
[Guest 2]: All were nominated for Oscars.
[Unknown]: Two won Best Oscar film.
[Amit Varma]: And he was dying during Deer Hunter.
[Guest 1]: Deer Hunter also.
[Guest 1]: Godfather and Godfather.
[Guest 2]: And Godfather, yeah, both the Godfathers.
[Guest 2]: And then he was there in Conversations.
[Guest 2]: And he was Meryl Streep's boyfriend at the time.
[Guest 2]: Meryl Streep, in fact, John Kazal and Pacino were best of buddies because they were in the theater scene.
[Guest 2]: And they would act in a lot of Broadway plays and stuff.
[Guest 2]: And then Kazal came in through Pacino.
[Guest 2]: And then by the time Deer Hunter was almost completing shooting, he had contracted cancer.
[Guest 2]: And Meryl Streep, same, it's like that Katharine Hepburn story.
[Guest 2]: She absolutely cared for him till the end.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, anyway, that's a different thing.
[Guest 2]: But I mean, maybe Jai will pipe in on Brian De Palma.
[Guest 2]: A guy who possibly has, again, the later work possibly has not held up.
[Guest 2]: But during that time, he used to make some quite interesting films.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there is a movie called Sisters.
[Guest 1]: Sisters is great.
[Guest 1]: Well, to me, I mean, obviously, no disrespect to any of the others.
[Guest 1]: Because they all, I mean, The Godfather and The Godfather Part 2 are just stunningly great films.
[Guest 1]: And what Scorsese did, etc.
[Guest 1]: But to me personally, De Palma is the most interesting of all of them.
[Guest 1]: In terms of his understanding of cinema and his ability to just take enormous risks.
[Guest 1]: And just make films that were incredibly uneven in places.
[Guest 1]: But, you know, just put everything that he needed to put into them.
[Guest 2]: So, Blow Out is one.
[Guest 2]: The Travolta.
[Guest 2]: So, Blow Out and Conversation are the two films that I actually sort of did a session about jointly last year.
[Guest 2]: He mixes the sound and the video together.
[Guest 2]: And then realizes what's happened is very different from what he was thinking.
[Guest 2]: It's also a part tribute to Blow Up and Antonioni's Blow Up.
[Guest 2]: And Sisters, again.
[Guest 1]: Sisters is an absolute favorite of mine.
[Guest 2]: Of De Palma.
[Guest 2]: So, again, people who are, and of course, again, if people have not watched Altman,
[Guest 2]: you know, one is an Altman noir called Long Goodbye.
[Guest 1]: Long Goodbye, yeah.
[Guest 2]: Which has Elliot Gould, who.
[Guest 1]: Best known to people of my generation as Ross and Monica's dad in Friends.
[Guest 1]: Not at all known to people of the generation after mine because Friends is cancelled.
[Guest 2]: Friends is also cancelled. All whites.
[Guest 1]: No, I mean, also, apparently full of jokes that are, that trigger people.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you know, if you look closely enough, everything is cancelled.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so, Altman had Long Goodbye, Altman had Nashville.
[Guest 2]: I love Nashville.
[Guest 2]: Nashville is like, how can you make a film where there are some 25 characters all speaking simultaneously?
[Amit Varma]: And there is all kinds of music.
[Amit Varma]: I think Jai might remember it. Nashville must have been in one of my top 10 lists,
[Amit Varma]: which I used to give in my callow days.
[Guest 1]: And then.
[Guest 1]: You still haven't given me your top 10 list from your non-callow days.
[Amit Varma]: I'll have to recommend five at the end of this.
[Guest 1]: So, five Bansalis and what else?
[Amit Varma]: Nice one. I mean, we could actually.
[Guest 1]: You can't include Khamoshi because Khamoshi is the Bansali.
[Guest 1]: Everybody says that's my favorite Bansali because, you know, it's the most understated.
[Amit Varma]: That is the only tolerable Bansali, but I didn't like even that, actually.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, I'll come to my list at the end.
[Amit Varma]: First, let us take our journey through the decades.
[Amit Varma]: Like, in a sense, the journey of Subrat from what we understand it today is really,
[Amit Varma]: you could write a book and call it from Bansali to Beyonce.
[Unknown]: Because she confessed to liking both, I think.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So, I mean, I think, yeah. So, again, I think people must watch some of them.
[Guest 2]: For instance, Altman. And I guess one of the things, I mean,
[Guest 2]: just the four, five of them that came up at the same time, right?
[Guest 2]: Scorsese, Coppola, Brandy Palmer. Who am I missing?
[Guest 2]: Lucas around that time.
[Guest 2]: Lucas, Kubrick, Altman. So, I mean.
[Guest 2]: Prakash Mehra.
[Guest 2]: Prakash Mehra as well. But, you know, it's funny that, I think, Spielberg also at the time.
[Guest 2]: So, it's funny that Spielberg and Scorsese, who, I mean, Spielberg always knew
[Guest 2]: some kind of a thing about the pulse of the mass.
[Guest 2]: And I think he was very good at that and not too sort of taken in by vision, etc.
[Guest 2]: And very sort of that kind of a guy.
[Guest 2]: And I think Scorsese, because his films were in some sense very sort of internal.
[Guest 2]: They're always biopic like with story of a person.
[Guest 2]: I mean, everything.
[Guest 2]: I mean, including some of his names of his films are also very sort of.
[Guest 2]: Taxi Driver, King of Comedy, Aviator, so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: So, I think that's why they kind of, whereas the two guys, whereas Coppola was big theme guy.
[Guest 2]: And I think once the time went, those themes didn't resonate.
[Guest 2]: And the other guy was, I think, Palmer, who was very style sort of driven guy.
[Guest 2]: I think when the style went, I think he got a little dated.
[Guest 2]: He could not keep up with the style.
[Guest 2]: But during those times, those guys just did fantastic work.
[Guest 1]: From the same generation, there's also, you know, with a little before them,
[Guest 1]: there was Arthur Penn, who also, you know, and one of the things,
[Guest 1]: one of the conversations I'm hoping to have sometime soon with my online group is
[Guest 1]: some of the really under the radar films of the 70s that belong broadly to this group of directors.
[Guest 1]: So, one of the films, for instance, is The Missouri Breaks,
[Guest 1]: which has Marlon Brando and Jack Nicholson, which is directed by Arthur Penn,
[Guest 1]: which is a quite interesting film.
[Guest 1]: It's not really a major work in that sense.
[Guest 1]: But what is interesting that is also Scarecrow with Gene Hackman and the very young Al Pacino,
[Guest 1]: which is interesting that some of these that are worth looking at.
[Guest 1]: When Coppola was sort of, when he was being set up as the leader of this group of directors,
[Guest 1]: Peter Bogdanovich was right up there with it, except that Bogdanovich, of course,
[Guest 1]: he made two or three very acclaimed films and then he sort of faded.
[Guest 2]: The Last Picture Show is just fantastic, Paper Moon, even Bogdanovich's The Noir.
[Guest 2]: Even Targets, which was with Boris Karlovich, which is an interesting meta film.
[Guest 1]: But, of course, Bogdanovich eventually sort of, I think, went more in the direction of being a film historian.
[Guest 2]: Nice interviews, great conversations.
[Guest 1]: We're talking about book recommendations, Bogdanovich's Book of Conversations with Orson Welles.
[Guest 1]: This is Orson Welles, one of the most interesting, it's easily up there with the Hitchcock True Four book,
[Guest 1]: which always gets so much publicity.
[Guest 2]: Actually, Bogdanovich did a screwball comedy for the 70s.
[Guest 1]: What's Up Dog with Barbra Streisand.
[Guest 1]: A tribute to Bringing Our Baby, because he was a huge fan of Howard Hawks.
[Guest 1]: So Bogdanovich was also one of the great champions of Howard Hawks.
[Guest 2]: Did we mention Hawks?
[Unknown]: We have not mentioned Hawks.
[Unknown]: We've mentioned him now.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so along with Preston Sturgess, the other guy was Howard Hawks,
[Guest 2]: who had this whole idea of something called a Hawksian woman or the Hawksian heroine, right?
[Guest 2]: So who, like the Barbra Steinway, and Bringing Our Baby, the front page, what was the name of the film?
[Guest 1]: His Girl Friday.
[Guest 2]: His Girl Friday.
[Guest 1]: So he also is another director, and this is something I've experienced firsthand through a somewhat acrimonious exchange online.
[Guest 1]: The sort of director that you just sort of end up having to defend,
[Guest 1]: because he was very much, in some ways, in some superficially interpreted ways,
[Guest 1]: he was very much a male director.
[Guest 1]: He had a masculine, he was a man's man from a certain period.
[Guest 1]: And some of that gets reflected in his films.
[Guest 1]: Though for my money, his best films have fascinating women characters.
[Guest 2]: And who are always retorting.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest 1]: But of course, this ties into the ways in which one has different ideological lenses while watching films.
[Guest 1]: His Girl Friday, which to my mind is such an empowering film from,
[Guest 1]: though of course I'm speaking as a guy also, from the gender parity point of view,
[Guest 1]: especially because it was a remake of a play and a film where Hawks and his writers took a male character
[Guest 1]: and turned that male character into a woman with a lot of power within the story.
[Guest 1]: But I had a bit of an online argument once with someone who said,
[Guest 1]: His Girl Friday is a chauvinistic film because it ends with this woman following Cary Grant out of the room.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think people who do all this, their lives are so sad because they're not taking in art for its own sake,
[Amit Varma]: for the beauty and the joy that is in art.
[Guest 1]: They're putting a lens on everything.
[Amit Varma]: What can I get offended by to show how virtuous I am?
[Guest 1]: Well, you know, we should keep in mind that we are after all three men talking about this right now.
[Guest 1]: So maybe we should be a bit circumspect.
[Guest 1]: But it's not just art for art's sake.
[Guest 1]: It's also that, you know, once my problem with this sort of ideological interpretation of a certain sort
[Guest 1]: is that once you have those blinkers on, you sometimes just, you know, prevent yourself from seeing the entirety of the work.
[Guest 1]: You just sort of, you see only what you need to see.
[Guest 1]: And again, coming back to what we said earlier, that, you know, you need a single takeaway from the work.
[Guest 1]: Is this film, is it a liberal film or a progressive film?
[Guest 1]: Is it progressive or regressive? Is it liberal or conservative?
[Guest 1]: And you're looking for or you're asking reductive questions like that.
[Guest 1]: You will only, you know, get reductive answers, which you will supply yourself.
[Guest 1]: Whereas a lot of the sorts of films we are talking about are much more complex in terms of their entirety,
[Guest 1]: in terms of what they're doing.
[Guest 1]: And I'm not even saying that somebody who makes this point about a Howard Hawks film or a John Ford film is wrong.
[Guest 1]: I'm not saying that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is one point. There is so much else.
[Guest 1]: It is one way of looking at something.
[Guest 1]: And there are counterpoints to it within the same work.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, so, but yeah, so Hawks is, I mean, Hawks also, Hawks directed The Big Sleep, the original Philip Marlowe,
[Guest 1]: which is one of the most incomprehensible great films ever made at the plot level.
[Guest 1]: Because even Raymond Chandler had no idea who the murderer was, who one of the murderers was.
[Guest 2]: And then he also, did he do To Have and Have Not?
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So he did To Have and Have Not.
[Guest 2]: This is a trivia quiz question.
[Unknown]: Faulkner, Hemingway.
[Unknown]: To Have and Have Not.
[Unknown]: Has he spoiled the question?
[Guest 1]: He spoiled the question.
[Unknown]: Why do you spoil questions?
[Unknown]: Oh, it was an actual question.
[Unknown]: I was asking Amit.
[Guest 2]: The only film which has a screenplay that's done by two Nobel Prize winners.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing question. You missed it.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, carry on.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, so we went to Hawks because we were on Bogdanovich.
[Guest 2]: So what was Bogdanovich doing? What's Up Dog, Last Picture Show, Paper Moon.
[Guest 2]: I think after that he disappeared.
[Guest 2]: 70s, if you take Hindi, I think some of the masala, you know, Vijayanand, Goldie,
[Guest 2]: which is Johnny Mera Naam and Jyoti, great fun films.
[Guest 1]: There's also the little film which I realized that no one, no young person, quote unquote,
[Guest 1]: in any of the classes I've taught has seen.
[Guest 1]: Many of them have heard of it, Sholay, 1975.
[Guest 1]: I was having this discussion about Sanjeev Kumar the other day, you know,
[Guest 1]: who, as you know, he passed away at a young age in the 1980s.
[Guest 1]: And therefore is sort of completely under the radar of many people
[Guest 1]: who were not around when those films were coming out.
[Guest 1]: So there are people who sort of vaguely know who Sanjeev Kumar is
[Guest 1]: because they've seen him in a poster of Sholay with a shawl.
[Guest 1]: So they sort of figured that that's the person.
[Guest 1]: So these are people who know Sholay by name.
[Guest 1]: Some of them know The Godfather by name.
[Guest 1]: But watching these films is out of the question.
[Guest 1]: End of rant.
[Amit Varma]: Brutal, brutal. I mean, there should be, there should, like,
[Amit Varma]: if there's a serial killer in Delhi who is going around killing young people
[Unknown]: who don't appreciate cinema adequately.
[Unknown]: The needle of suspicion.
[Unknown]: The needle of suspicion has to go to, you know.
[Guest 1]: It would have to be the grandson of the disco killer killer.
[Amit Varma]: The disco dancer killer.
[Amit Varma]: We don't know your antecedents too well.
[Amit Varma]: So what is one to say?
[Amit Varma]: All right, back to Subrath for the 800th time.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so the 80s, yeah, I mean, the 80s.
[Guest 2]: 80s is only Back to the Future and Mr. India.
[Guest 2]: Back to the Future, Mr. India.
[Guest 1]: Mr. India is good fun.
[Amit Varma]: Amit's favorite Sridevi film, Nagina.
[Amit Varma]: I thought you were going to say John Huston's dead, but never mind.
[Guest 2]: Nagina pe aage.
[Unknown]: Ungli mein anguthi, anguthi mein Nagina.
[Guest 2]: Harmesh Malhotra, I was the guy who used to make these Nagina films.
[Guest 2]: Nigahe Nagina, Harmesh Malhotra.
[Guest 2]: He made these movies.
[Guest 2]: I mean, no, you don't need to know him for any other reason except this.
[Unknown]: But are you recommending these films?
[Unknown]: No, no, no.
[Guest 2]: I see, I think, if I remember right,
[Guest 2]: Jai had recommended Rahul Ravel, who I can't recommend enough.
[Guest 2]: He was great fun.
[Guest 2]: Then I will recommend a few JP Dutta films of the 80s.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, of course.
[Guest 1]: JP Dutta, Mukul Anand to some degree also.
[Guest 1]: These are directors who had some sort of, you know, the visual sensibility at a time
[Guest 1]: when there wasn't that much of it happening in the Hindi mainstream.
[Guest 2]: Hatyaar and stuff.
[Guest 2]: Hatyaar, Gulami.
[Guest 2]: And then, of course, Rajiv Rai.
[Guest 2]: I mean, maybe it was my time and whatever, the time and context in which I saw Yod.
[Guest 2]: Tridev, I mean, if you want to watch an 80s film in India, you know, watch Tridev.
[Guest 2]: Tridev is the ultimate 80s masala film.
[Guest 2]: There are three big heroes.
[Guest 2]: There is Amrish Puri.
[Guest 2]: And every single guy that you see in 80s movie Peeche as one of the henchmen is there.
[Guest 2]: In fact, all of them are there together in one song, where they are trying to disrobe
[Guest 2]: Sangeeta Bijlani, you know, through the song one after one.
[Guest 1]: The much bigger villains gallery though was in Naseeb.
[Guest 2]: Naseeb also, yes.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, I have personal liking for Dan Dhanoa, Mahesh Anand, these sidey guys.
[Guest 1]: Underappreciated sidekicks.
[Guest 2]: Dan Dhanoa, Mahesh Anand, Dilip Tahil is there.
[Guest 2]: What is that, that Sapru, Tej Sapru, Seema Sapru's brother.
[Guest 2]: Seema Sapru was the person who was there in every Ram Seh brother, Ram Seh films.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, 80s Ram Seh films should also be watched.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, we haven't even come to Ram Seh.
[Guest 1]: I mean, Shamu Dasgupta's book, my friend Shamu Dasgupta's book, which I wrote an introduction for.
[Guest 2]: Loga Zameen Ke Niche Hai was the early 70s film, which was the film that established Ram Seh.
[Guest 2]: This Imtiaz, the brother of Amjad Khan is the character, sort of the bad guy there.
[Guest 2]: But 80s Ram Seh really took off with one movie called Vee Rana.
[Guest 2]: Purana Mandir.
[Guest 1]: Which unofficially though, it's not there on any records apparently because of the way records were maintained or not maintained for smaller towns.
[Guest 1]: But apparently it was the second biggest hit of the year in Hindi cinema.
[Guest 2]: Manish Bahl's debut.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it has some good songs also.
[Amit Varma]: Mujhe lag raha hai ki show notes banate banate, is episode phule main paagal ho jaunga.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: You'll have to, just in the interest of research, you'll have to watch all these films.
[Amit Varma]: Fat chance of me doing that.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, just putting the show notes only will take a week.
[Guest 2]: People should watch Vee Rana.
[Guest 2]: People should watch some of those early Govinda films.
[Guest 2]: And of course, Babbar Subhash.
[Guest 2]: Babbar Subhash we've already spoken about.
[Guest 2]: But some of these early Govinda films.
[Guest 2]: The guy was so happy.
[Guest 1]: He was a force of nature.
[Guest 1]: You know, even before the David Dhawan phases.
[Unknown]: Before that I'm saying.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So, you know, films like Ilzaam.
[Guest 1]: I remember having a sense.
[Guest 1]: Though I think I was already getting phased out of the world of Hindi cinema around that time.
[Guest 1]: My mother would end up being a big Govinda fan in the 90s.
[Guest 1]: But I remember just having a sense that here is someone who is very unusual.
[Guest 2]: Who's just this presence.
[Amit Varma]: Very uninhibited.
[Amit Varma]: So far you've made predictions about two young Bollywood stars.
[Amit Varma]: One is Govinda.
[Amit Varma]: One is Ranveer Singh.
[Amit Varma]: So well done.
[Amit Varma]: That's a good track record.
[Guest 2]: About Govinda is, yeah, even on Govinda he felt that there is something.
[Unknown]: He felt that there is something and it turned out that there was.
[Guest 2]: So Ilzaam, I mean, although I am a street dancer.
[Guest 2]: I mean, just great.
[Guest 2]: Govinda was good fun.
[Guest 2]: Even before David Dhawan.
[Guest 2]: I think in Hollywood, like I said, you can do some of this.
[Guest 2]: Peter Weyer watching and you can do.
[Guest 1]: We haven't even really got into world cinema or what we call world cinema.
[Guest 1]: Anyway, but I think, you know, we just started off with Amit asking us for five recommendations each.
[Unknown]: We've basically gone through all of film history.
[Guest 1]: And you need to come and help me teach this class that I'm starting from next month.
[Guest 1]: Especially with all the PC Barua and KL Sehgal context.
[Unknown]: Happy to do.
[Amit Varma]: They can't cancel PC Barua.
[Amit Varma]: Because he's PC.
[Guest 2]: Sorry.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, we have not done world cinema.
[Guest 2]: But 80s was a good time for some of that also.
[Guest 2]: I mean, absolutely.
[Guest 1]: So Amit, you have to now give us your list.
[Guest 2]: Let him finish first.
[Guest 1]: Oh, okay.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, 90s.
[Guest 2]: Then, of course, there are, I think I did mention John Dahl.
[Guest 2]: I think there are, of course, Tarantino came, Roberto Rodriguez.
[Guest 2]: There are some smaller films of these guys.
[Guest 2]: I mean, for instance, Jackie Brown, I think is a better Tarantino film than most.
[Guest 2]: I don't know.
[Guest 1]: What do you think about?
[Guest 1]: Well, my favorite is actually Pulp Fiction, which is a very boring thing to say.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, I mean, we've missed one of his strengths, as I discovered when I was just talking to him before this.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the whole Wes Craven and John Carpenter stuff, Halloween and Nightmare on M3, which I just absolutely enjoyed a lot.
[Guest 2]: Scream.
[Guest 2]: Scream had some of the early stars.
[Guest 2]: I mean, all kinds of the first Scream.
[Guest 1]: The early 90s also, I just remembered because I was discussing this with someone recently, has one of the great, to my mind, action films, Terminator 2.
[Unknown]: I saw it just two months back.
[Guest 1]: I just find myself appreciating that film more and more because I feel again at risk of sounding like this old person who can't take too much of the new.
[Guest 1]: But that isn't it, because there's another much more recent film that I love is Mad Max Fury Road, which I think was just a wonderful film.
[Guest 1]: No qualification at all that it's a wonderful action film.
[Guest 1]: But jokes about Christopher Nolan aside, because obviously the guy has a lot of strengths, etc.
[Guest 1]: One of the problems I have with his Batman films is that the action sequences in them are so cluttered.
[Guest 1]: I very often just can't make sense of them.
[Guest 1]: I can't make sense of them at the level of where is one character in relation to the other character.
[Guest 1]: There's such a thing as doing chaos deliberately, which is a different thing.
[Guest 1]: But with some of the action sequences in Christopher Nolan's films, including the Dark Knight and so on, I just get the impression that it's just messy because he hasn't been able to declutter it.
[Guest 1]: And then when I look at something like Mad Max Fury Road or The Terminator 2, those are examples to my mind of really clean action films where you're getting the thrill and the adrenaline and there's a lot going on at the same time.
[Guest 1]: But you know exactly what's happening at all the time.
[Guest 2]: I rewatched it two months back because I was showing it to my 13 year old.
[Guest 2]: So, you are right, the first motorbike chase, this guy goes above that, you know, it's just especially you are there, right?
[Guest 2]: You are right.
[Guest 2]: I mean, a lot of broader Avengers and this Marvel Universe stuff, sometimes especially I can't make out what is happening because it's all three dimensional stuff that's happening.
[Guest 2]: Here, it's clear, it's coming from here and going from there.
[Guest 1]: So, I think that's something that you just have to acknowledge that when it happens.
[Guest 1]: I don't know what you think of Mad Max Fury Road, if you've seen it or something.
[Amit Varma]: I intended to see it, but I haven't seen it yet.
[Amit Varma]: So, I will see it now.
[Amit Varma]: But what I did read about it was somebody saying something to the effect of if you watch it at double speed, everything still makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what that means.
[Amit Varma]: I don't watch films at double speed, by the way.
[Guest 1]: No, but I don't think you should do that.
[Amit Varma]: Or there was some meta comment on it so well constructed that it, you know, whatever.
[Guest 2]: Actually, the great part about 90s and 2000s that I have enjoyed.
[Guest 2]: And now again, it has also started becoming a bit of a thing, which it's fine.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's like my early fascination for Mithun and Govinda.
[Guest 2]: Then later I realized that that itself has become sort of everybody.
[Guest 2]: I have always been a fan of Nicolas Cage and Keanu Reeves.
[Guest 2]: And I'm so glad that today there is one separate cult of Keanu Reeves and Nicolas Cage.
[Guest 2]: So much so that there is a separate film about Nicolas Cage being Nicolas Cage.
[Unknown]: Which was about two months, one month back that has come out.
[Amit Varma]: First time I saw Nicolas Cage was in Wild at Heart.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I think it won the Golden Palm at Cannes.
[Guest 2]: No, Nicolas Cage is there in, there is a John Dahl movie in which Nicolas Cage is there.
[Guest 2]: I think it's called, what is it called? The Last Seduction or something.
[Guest 2]: Of course, the other guy was Edward Norton, who I used to love in those late 90s films.
[Guest 1]: He made a great anti-virus film.
[Guest 2]: American Violence, whatever, American History.
[Guest 1]: American History X.
[Guest 2]: History X and Rounders as well.
[Amit Varma]: You must like Rounders, it's a poker film.
[Amit Varma]: I like Rounders, I mean all poker films get poker completely wrong.
[Unknown]: Including this one.
[Amit Varma]: But Rounders is fine.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it doesn't commit sacrilegious, I mean it simplifies as Hollywood must.
[Guest 2]: But 90s again on the Hindi and actually 80s there is a movie called New Delhi Times.
[Unknown]: This is this Shikapur and Anand Sharma, Ramesh Sharma.
[Guest 2]: Great film, Gulzar's script.
[Guest 2]: I like the film, that was a good film.
[Guest 2]: 90s again, I think one of the, of course, Satya and other things changed stuff.
[Guest 2]: But the Drohokal of Nilani, I had enjoyed at that time.
[Guest 2]: There were some classic masala stuff of 90s also, which is not bad.
[Guest 2]: Gupt, for instance, again coming back to Rajiv Rai and Mohra, both.
[Guest 2]: Wow, total.
[Guest 1]: And this Millennium, we're not talking about at all, because we need to get to Amit's list.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what I'm thinking is that, you know, aur koi sune na sune is episode ko Rajiv Rai sunega.
[Guest 2]: I mean, more than Rajiv Rai, I hope Sonam listens to it.
[Unknown]: Sonam is his wife.
[Unknown]: I'm a big fan.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and yeah, she might send you fan mail, email.
[Amit Varma]: Not Sonam Kapoor, but Sonam.
[Unknown]: All three of us are old enough to get that.
[Guest 2]: By the way, whose original name was Bakhtiyar Khan.
[Guest 2]: But anyway, I mean, I'll not bore with 2000s and 2010s, but that's a whole list of stuff that people can watch.
[Guest 1]: I think a lot of it is not very obscure.
[Guest 1]: Amit, your 15 favorite Hindi masala films of the 2000s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so Fanda kya hai ki when I sent you guys this email saying ki paanch paanch film aap name karo, underappreciated.
[Amit Varma]: Then I thought that shit, why did I volunteer myself for this?
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't really feel like choosing five.
[Amit Varma]: And also I keep talking about films, so I don't want to go through the same ones ki Decalogue achha hai, yeh achha hai, woh achha hai.
[Amit Varma]: I've spoken so much about films.
[Amit Varma]: So I decided to narrow the focus down so sharply that it becomes easy to choose.
[Amit Varma]: So I narrowed the focus to films that I watched at Mummy over the last three, four years.
[Amit Varma]: World Cinema that I discovered there.
[Amit Varma]: So very quickly, these are the films I'd recommend.
[Amit Varma]: There's a very fine film called Wild, directed by Nicolette Krebitz.
[Amit Varma]: Have you seen it?
[Amit Varma]: So it's a lovely film about this woman who's, it's a German film, who's in the city and she's got a bad job and her boss is an asshole.
[Amit Varma]: And she's kind of fed up.
[Amit Varma]: And once in a while, she'll go out into the woods, into the forest and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And through a mysterious turn of events, she kidnaps a wolf.
[Amit Varma]: And she gets a wolf back in her apartment with her.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the wolf, if I remember correctly, is kind of serrated when she manages to bring it back, but obviously snaps out of that state.
[Amit Varma]: And now there's a lot of work.
[Amit Varma]: She's got to feed the wolf. She's got to build a relationship with the wolf.
[Amit Varma]: She's got to make sure the wolf doesn't kill her.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting how it develops.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very interior psychological kind of film.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is a real wolf, it's not a wolf played by Andy Serkis.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's a real wolf.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a lovely film.
[Amit Varma]: Sexual overtones and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very, it's a very, you know, a different kind of film.
[Amit Varma]: Just to have the courage to conceive of it and then make it so well, kind of really impressed me.
[Amit Varma]: Another film is actually a mainstream Hollywood film that didn't get any Oscar nominations, didn't make waves, which is very sad.
[Amit Varma]: It's called Waves.
[Amit Varma]: It's by a director called Trey Edward Schultz.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought it's an absolute masterpiece when I saw it.
[Amit Varma]: And it did get some rave reviews from some people I respect, but made absolutely no mark, either in the box office or at the Oscars or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a lovely film, which has two sort of rhythms to it.
[Amit Varma]: Like if you enjoy listening to, if you enjoy the part that music can play in a film really well, you know, you kind of get it here.
[Amit Varma]: Where the first half of the film about this young man who's, you know, pumped up and on adrenaline and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: The first half of the film, it's like the music is just driving it forward.
[Amit Varma]: There is this relentless propulsion that is happening.
[Amit Varma]: Till giving nothing away, the guy dies.
[Amit Varma]: And then the rest of the film follows his sister and how she copes with it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very quiet, slow, lot of tear off.
[Amit Varma]: It's a sudden change in rhythm.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it's so beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: And these halves fit together so well.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought it was a masterpiece, but just went unnoticed by almost everyone.
[Amit Varma]: The third film, perhaps controversial, is Gaspar Noe's film Climax, which is about a bunch of people at a party.
[Amit Varma]: And somebody mixes psychedelic stuff in their drinks, I think LSD.
[Amit Varma]: And it just, it just goes nuts.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a film that doesn't have a logical plot from a point of view of things happening beyond what I just told you.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of hard to describe.
[Amit Varma]: But they kind of, like, they kind of go mad.
[Amit Varma]: Everything goes crazy.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just so visceral.
[Amit Varma]: It's like you're sitting in a movie hall and everything about it, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very choreographed film in the sense there's a lot of movement.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the way everything comes together.
[Guest 1]: I thought that was very visceral.
[Guest 1]: Gaspar Noe's film about people not being intoxicated would be quite visceral anyway.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the film is oddly described as a psychological horror, but I don't even know if it's that.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if any category really fits.
[Amit Varma]: And another film described as psychological horror, which I think is again a phosphate, is Darren Aronofsky's Mother.
[Amit Varma]: Which again, similar visceral experience.
[Amit Varma]: The plot makes absolutely no sense.
[Amit Varma]: And half the people I was with in the hall when we saw it were just like, what the fuck is this?
[Unknown]: Makes no sense.
[Amit Varma]: And the other half is just reeling like I was at the sheer force of the film.
[Amit Varma]: And again, it's one of those things where you just have to kind of sit back and experience it and leave your brain out of it.
[Amit Varma]: So if you misplace your brain, Jai, as you were saying you'll never do, you should probably watch this.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, a film I mentioned earlier in this episode, One Cut of the Dead by Shinichiro Ueda.
[Amit Varma]: Japanese horror film and it's like a film within a film.
[Amit Varma]: It's about a bunch of guys trying to make a single cut film and it's a horror film and what happens to them.
[Amit Varma]: And it is no other film that I have ever seen has communicated the joy of cinema better than this.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, at the surface level, it's a bunch of guys trying to make a film and taking joy in that.
[Amit Varma]: But the joy I got from sitting in the audience was kind of incredible.
[Amit Varma]: So I narrowed my gaze down to films I've seen at MAMI in the last five years.
[Amit Varma]: And these five would be, you know, among the ones that really hit me hard and moved me.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, that's my list.
[Guest 1]: That's a great list. So you'll have that on the show notes as well, right?
[Amit Varma]: I'll have these on the show notes. I don't know how many of these will be available.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's another great film called Echo by Dren Jerka, which I didn't mention because I've spoken about it before on the show.
[Amit Varma]: And I couldn't even find a link to that. I mean, it's nowhere.
[Guest 1]: I think Mother is there or one of the OTTs, but I don't know about the others.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know about Wild. I don't. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But a couple of final questions before we shout out at the end.
[Amit Varma]: And a question for you, Subrat, what happened to Haal Chaal Theek Tak Hai?
[Amit Varma]: That was a very fine podcast that you used to run with your friend.
[Guest 2]: Well, Pawan and I ran it, not finding enough time.
[Guest 2]: Pawan normally has many other things that he keeps dabbling with.
[Guest 2]: I have sort of the pandemic gave us some spare time.
[Guest 2]: So we did that. We did 10 episodes, each episode running over three hours.
[Guest 2]: So that's good quality content, including one episode where we spoke at length on Mr. Sampath actually.
[Guest 1]: I did. I'll look out for it.
[Guest 2]: You'll have to go through a lot of draws before you reach that.
[Amit Varma]: Immense modesty in calling it draws. Beautiful conversations about films from two people who are clearly so passionate about it.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, it's films and books. And I mean, every time there is a theme. So it's about like we take a theme of train.
[Guest 2]: And then we talk about films on train and books on train and with Indian context, mostly very, very little outside of India thing.
[Guest 2]: But anyway, so hopefully again, we will get it started. I mean, there is enough and more material to speak about.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, I mean, we thoroughly enjoyed the 10 episodes over three hours.
[Guest 2]: And both of us have sort of the same kind of experiences.
[Guest 2]: And we do remember quite a bit like the jingles and the opening credits of all the Dharavahiks, which we do.
[Guest 2]: Well, that's yeah, I mean, someday. But we have a lot of Hindi literature recommendations there.
[Guest 2]: Because Pawan reads a lot as well, especially Hindi.
[Guest 2]: Are you ever going to resume the podcast?
[Guest 2]: I mean, we've always been thinking so we'll have to just one day decide and take the time and do that.
[Guest 2]: It used to take a fair amount of production work, quite honestly, because we used to do it during the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: It was at home and I was doing many much of that. I can't do that.
[Guest 2]: So maybe we get a studio, we just come together and start and finish within three hours and that gets done.
[Guest 2]: So that's, that's that. Again, I think I mean, there are some book recommendations.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I like to read a lot, you know, people can...
[Unknown]: You mean book recommendations?
[Guest 2]: I mean, general book recommendations, of course, I mean, there are, I mean, that I have all the time, you know, people can.
[Guest 2]: I mean, of late again, I've gone back into some of the classics.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I've reread Thomas Mann.
[Guest 2]: Magic Mountain.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, the Magic Mountain, Death in Venice.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's, you read it again, you find there is so much there. It's great fun.
[Guest 2]: Calvino again, I mean, Invisible Cities and...
[Amit Varma]: My favorite Calvino is Cosmic Comics.
[Amit Varma]: Cosmic Comics, yeah.
[Guest 2]: I mean, Calvino during, again, during pandemic, it was good to read again.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's so intricate, you know, plot has all kinds of things there.
[Guest 2]: If on a winter's night, a traveler and all of that.
[Guest 2]: So read Calvino, people read, for me, read Rushdie as well.
[Guest 2]: I'm a great Rushdie fan. I'm really sorry for what's happened to him.
[Guest 1]: I've been rereading A House for Mr. Biswas recently.
[Guest 2]: Great book.
[Guest 1]: Enjoying it very much.
[Guest 2]: I think, same, I mean, yeah, Naipaul, Bend in the River, A House for Mr. Biswas.
[Guest 2]: Fantastic. Middlemarch is one that I read again after a long time.
[Guest 2]: Well deserved sort of thing where people say that it holds even after so many years.
[Guest 2]: Again, read, I had not read Mrs. Dalloway.
[Guest 2]: I read that during the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: I'd read To the Lighthouse, but I've not read this one.
[Guest 2]: So, yeah, I mean, there are, I mean, of course, we didn't talk about some of the,
[Guest 2]: actually, we didn't talk at all about English films.
[Amit Varma]: We didn't talk, and also I wanted a Bollywood appreciation course, but we didn't,
[Amit Varma]: you guys, I forgot to ask about that.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe next episode, you can give me a Bollywood appreciation course.
[Guest 2]: We didn't do English films, but I mean, I'm just, I'm a huge fan of that whole, you know,
[Guest 2]: Graham Greene, Evelyn Waugh era.
[Guest 2]: You know, Waugh was just such a fantastic writer.
[Guest 2]: The Decline in the Fall, Scoop, and just so much of satire, such gentle comedy.
[Guest 2]: And, of course, Greene, I mean, Brighton Rocks is one of my favorite books of all times.
[Guest 2]: And the film, I mean, with Attenborough.
[Guest 2]: Attenborough's Pinky.
[Guest 2]: Attenborough's Pinky, I mean, just visceral film and, you know,
[Guest 2]: people don't realize how good an actor also Attenborough was.
[Guest 2]: Very physical.
[Guest 1]: Greene also did some very interesting film reviews in the 30s.
[Unknown]: Including that notorious one about Shirley Temple,
[Guest 1]: where he sort of just pointed out that many people,
[Guest 1]: many men watching her would not exactly be seeing her as a sweet little girl.
[Guest 1]: And, of course, he got lacerated for it because how dare you even bring up that possibility.
[Unknown]: Yeah, it's unnameable.
[Guest 1]: It clearly exists only in your mind.
[Guest 1]: It can't exist anywhere else.
[Guest 2]: But again, I mean, I love that.
[Guest 2]: I like Kingsley Amiss.
[Guest 2]: I like, of course, his son as well.
[Guest 2]: But Kingsley Amiss, again, great, fantastic writing.
[Guest 2]: Some of the J.G. Farrell, The Siege of Krishnapur, The Empire Trilogy.
[Amit Varma]: Again, fantastic books.
[Amit Varma]: Kingsley Amiss, you know, joined this gymnasium near his house to work out.
[Amit Varma]: And they were big fans of his.
[Amit Varma]: And they just felt so fortunate that he's joined them.
[Amit Varma]: So then renamed themselves Lucky Gym.
[Guest 2]: And even those, like I said, those late 60s, early 70s Brit films,
[Guest 2]: some of it they were carrying over the kitchen sink, you know,
[Guest 2]: sensibilities of the theater of that time into the films.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, Michael Caine in the early 70s and all, again,
[Guest 2]: there was a different force of nature.
[Guest 2]: If you watch Alfie Get Carter,
[Amit Varma]: where he goes back.
[Amit Varma]: And I think people of our age would fondly remember Blame It on Rio,
[Guest 1]: which was actually released in India, but for different reasons and cinematic merit.
[Guest 1]: A lot later though, in the 80s.
[Guest 2]: I know, I know.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so anyway, books, I mean, that's pretty much it.
[Guest 2]: I think I've thrown the kitchen sink at the whole question that you had.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, one of those people whose kitchen sink is full of books.
[Amit Varma]: So question for Jai and the final question for you,
[Amit Varma]: which is, is there something you'd like to plug on the show,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of courses you teach and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: since you, you know, have film appreciation courses.
[Guest 1]: Well, I've been for the last two years, since the pandemic,
[Guest 1]: and since I discovered this, the existence of this lovely thing called Zoom.
[Guest 1]: I have been hosting these, I taught a few courses as well,
[Guest 1]: but what I really preferred doing is hosting these online conversations.
[Guest 1]: Which are completely informal things.
[Guest 1]: And I've built up quite a bank of people whose email IDs are on this mailing list of mine.
[Guest 1]: And it's been fairly American cinema centric so far,
[Guest 1]: and of the 30s, 40s, 50s, different genres.
[Guest 1]: But I'm open to all sorts of conversations.
[Guest 1]: And once a month or so, I try to have a solid online conversation.
[Guest 1]: So if anyone wants to just follow me on either Facebook or Twitter or whatever,
[Guest 1]: you'll get the information there.
[Guest 1]: I usually put it up on my blog as well, Jabberwock,
[Guest 1]: which is searchable if you just search with my name on Google.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, so anyone who's really interested in conversations about films,
[Guest 1]: very informal, free flowing conversations where everybody can participate,
[Guest 1]: just show up there or just get in touch and all I need to do is put your mail ID on the list.
[Guest 2]: I'm on the mailing list.
[Guest 2]: I took one of the early, I think the first course that he did, I took it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but I haven't attended any of them.
[Guest 2]: But I've been a bit remiss in attending the bathtubs.
[Guest 1]: No, that's okay.
[Guest 1]: Most people, usually not more than 20-25 people show up.
[Guest 2]: I would completely, I mean, thoroughly enjoy it.
[Guest 2]: I don't know why for some reason.
[Guest 2]: I only get to know the day later that oh yeah,
[Guest 2]: so maybe I just need to sort of put it on my calendar.
[Guest 1]: That's understandable.
[Amit Varma]: But you have been getting the mail.
[Amit Varma]: I have been getting the mails very much.
[Amit Varma]: But I think for the next few weeks,
[Amit Varma]: I certainly can't attend one because I'll be making the show notes for this episode.
[Amit Varma]: So finally, all three of us have to make a shout out.
[Amit Varma]: I'll start.
[Guest 2]: Shout out to Daddu.
[Guest 2]: The founder of Warsaw Mumble Corps and a guy who has tried to delete his,
[Guest 2]: you know, digital footprint.
[Guest 2]: But I have that photograph of his in green shirt and with not a single strand of hair on his head.
[Amit Varma]: I have the address of the cave in Yemen where he currently resides.
[Guest 1]: And I have none of this information but shout out to Daddu nonetheless.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent.
[Amit Varma]: Guys, thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: You've been very patient and this is longer than the longest Bollywood film, right?
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully much more worth it.
[Guest 2]: Not Gangs of Wasseypur.
[Guest 2]: Not Tamas also.
[Guest 2]: Tamas was eight hours.
[Guest 2]: Okay, I lose.
[Unknown]: But thank you so much for coming.
[Unknown]: Tamas is Bollywood?
[Unknown]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest 1]: Thank you for having us.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.